<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Epilogical Letter to John Nicolas Mavrogordato</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="afterword" epub:type="afterword z399:letter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epilogical Letter to John Nicolas Mavrogordato</h2>
<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">My dear John,</p>

<p>There is, I am inclined to think, a very obstinate shamelessness in
prolonging this book with a letter to you. For that reason I append it
thus as an epilogue: so that whoever wishes to read it will only have
himself to blame, since he will already, as I hope, have finished the
book.</p>

<p>You will remember that last year "Youth's Encounter," the first part of
Michael Fane's story, obtained a great advertisement through the action
of certain libraries. Whatever boom was thus effected will certainly be
drowned this year in the roar of cannon, and the doctrine of
compensation is in no danger of being disproved. I fancy, too, that the
realities of war will obtain me a pardon in "Sinister Street," the
second volume, for anything that might formerly have offended the
sensitive or affronted the simple.</p>

<p>Much more important than libraries and outraged puritans is the question
of the form of the English novel. There has lately been noticeable in
the press a continuous suggestion that the modern novel is thinly
disguised autobiography; and since the lives of most men are peculiarly
formless this suggestion has been amplified into an attack upon the form
of the novel. In my own case many critics have persisted in regarding
"Youth's Encounter" merely as an achievement of memory, and I have felt
sometimes that I ought to regard myself as a sort of literary Datas,
rather than as a mask veiling the nature of a novelist. You know from
many hours of talk that if I were to set down all I could remember of my
childhood, the book would not by this time have reached much beyond my
fifth year. Obviously in so far as I chose my own public school and my
own college at Oxford there has been autobiography, but I fancy it would
have been merely foolish to send Michael to Cambridge, a place of which
I know absolutely nothing. Yourself assures me that nowadays it is a
much better university than Oxford, and in thinking thus you are the
only Oxford man who has ever held such a heresy. Obviously, too, it was
unavoidable in writing about St. James' that I should draw certain
characters from the life, and for doing this I have been attacked on
grounds of good taste. I do not recognize the right of schoolmasters to
be exempt from the privilege of public men to be sometimes caricatured.
Therefore, I offer no apology for doing so. With regard to the Oxford
dons I felt it really would be unfair to apply to them what is after all
much more likely to be a true impression of their virtues and follies
than those formed by a schoolboy of his masters. Therefore, in this
second volume, "Sinister Street," there is not a single portrait of a
don. As a matter of fact, dons are to the undergraduate a much less
important factor than the schoolmaster is to the schoolboy, and the few
shadows of dons which appear in this volume are as vital as most dons in
the flesh seem to the normal undergraduate.</p>

<p>The theme of these two stories is the youth of a man who presumably will
be a priest. I shall be grateful if my readers will accept it as such
rather than as an idealized or debased presentation of my own existence
up to the age of twenty-three. Whether or not it was worth writing at
such length depends finally, I claim, upon the number of people who can
bear to read about it. A work of art is bounded by the capacity of the
spectator to apprehend it as a whole. This on your authority was said by
Aristotle. "Art," says <i>The Sydney Bulletin</i>, a curious antipodean
paper, "is selection." "It is time to protest," says an American paper,
"against these long books." At this rate, we shall soon be spending all
our time with books. "The enormous length must make it formless," other
critics have decided. Ultimately I believe Aristotle's remark to be the
truest guide, and I am tempted to hope that with the publication of the
second volume many irrelevancies have established their relevancy.</p>

<p>It is obvious that were I to continue the life of Michael Fane to the
end of his seventy-second year, his story would run into twenty volumes
as thick as this book. My intention, however, was not to write a life,
but the prologue of a life. He is growing up on the last page, and for
me his interest begins to fade. He may have before him a thousand new
adventures: he may become a Benedictine monk: he may become a society
preacher. I have given you as fully as I could the various influences
that went to mold him. Your imagination of him as a man will be
determined by your prejudice gathered from the narrative of these
influences. I do not identify myself with his opinions: at the same time
I may believe in all of them. He is to me an objective reality: he is
not myself in a looking-glass.</p>

<p>I would like to detain you for a moment with a defense of my occasional
use of archaic and obsolete words. This is not due to any
"preciousness," but to efforts at finding the only word that will say
what I mean. To take two examples: "Reasty" signifies "covered with a
kind of rust and having a rancid taste," and it seems to me exactly to
describe the London air at certain seasons, and also by several
suggestive assonances to convey a variety of subtler effects.
"Inquiline" sounds a pompous word for lodgers, but it has not yet been
sentimentalized like "pilgrim"; it is not an Americanism like
"transients," and it does give to me the sense of a fleeting stay;
whereas lodgers sound dreadfully permanent since they have been given
votes.</p>

<p>We have in the English language the richest and noblest in the world,
and perhaps after this war we shall hear less of the advocates of pure
Saxon, an advocacy which personally I find rather like the attitude of
the plain man who wants to assert himself on his first introduction to a
duke.</p>

<p>There remains for me to apologize for the delay in the appearance of
this volume. You who know how many weeks I have spent ill in bed this
year will forgive me, and through you I make an apology to other readers
who by their expressions of interest in the date of the second volume
have encouraged me so greatly. Finally it strikes me that I have seemed
above to be grumbling at criticism. This is not so. I believe there is
nobody, certainly no young writer who is under such a debt of obligation
as I am to the encouragement and the sympathy of his anonymous critics.</p>

<p>Accept this dedicatory epilogue, my dear John, as the pledge of our
enduring friendship.</p>

			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Yours ever,</p>
				<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">Compton Mackenzie</p>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Iver, October 18, 1914</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
