<h3><a id="Chapter_I_The_New_World" name="Chapter_I_The_New_World"></a>Chapter I: <i>The New World</i></h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">F</span>ROM a world of daisies as big as moons and of mountainous green
hillocks Michael Fane came by some unrealized method of transport to the
thin red house, that as yet for his mind could not claim an individual
existence amid the uniformity of a long line of fellows. His arrival
coincided with a confusion of furniture, with the tramp of men backwards
and forwards from a cavernous vehicle very dry and dusty. He found
himself continually being lifted out of the way of washstands and
skeleton chests of drawers. He was invited to sit down and keep quiet,
and almost in the same breath to walk about and avoid hindrance.
Finally, Nurse led him up many resonant stairs to the night-nursery
which at present consisted of two square cots that with japanned iron
bars stood gauntly in a wilderness of oilcloth surrounded by four walls
patterned with a prolific vegetation. Michael was dumped down upon a
grey pillow and invited to see how well his sister Stella was behaving.
Nurse's observation was true enough: Stella was rosily asleep in an
undulation of blankets, and Michael, threatened by many whispers and
bony finger-shakes, was not at all inclined to wake her up. Nurse
retired in an aura of importance, and Michael set out to establish an
intimacy with the various iron bars of his cage. For a grown-up person
these would certainly have seemed much more alike than even the houses
of Carlington Road, West Kensington: for Michael each bar possessed a
personality. Minute scratches unnoticed by the heedless adult world lent
variety of expression: slight irregularities infused certain groups
with an air of deliberate consultation. From the four corners royal
bars, crowned with brass, dominated their subjects. Passions, intrigues,
rumours, ambitions, revenges were perceived by Michael to be seething
below the rigid exterior of these iron bars: even military operations
were sometimes discernible. This cot was guarded by a romantic
population, with one or two of whose units Michael could willingly have
dispensed: one bar in particular, set very much askew, seemed sly and
malignant. Michael disliked being looked at by anybody or anything, and
this bar had a persistent inquisitiveness which already worried him.
'Why does he look at me?' Michael would presently ask, and 'Nobody wants
to look at such an ugly little boy,' Nurse would presently reply. So one
more intolerable question would overshadow his peace of mind.</p>
<p>Meanwhile, far below, the tramp of men continued, until suddenly an
immense roar filled the room. Some of the bars shivered and clinked, and
Michael's heart nearly stopped. The roar died away only to be succeeded
by another roar from the opposite direction. Stella woke up crying.
Michael was too deeply frightened so to soothe himself, as he sat
clutching the pointed ears of the grey pillow. Stella, feeling that the
fretful tears of a sudden awakening were insufficient, set up a bellow
of dismay. Michael was motionless, only aware of a gigantic heart that
shook him horribly. At last the footsteps of Nurse could be heard, and
over them, the quick 'tut-tut-tuts' that voiced her irritation.</p>
<p>"You naughty boy, to wake up your little sister."</p>
<p>"What was that noise?" asked Michael.</p>
<p>"Your own noise," said Nurse sharply.</p>
<p>"It wasn't. It was lions."</p>
<p>"And if it <i>was</i> lions, what next?" said Nurse. "Lions will always come,
when little boys are naughty. Lions don't like naughty boys."</p>
<p>"Michael doesn't like lions."</p>
<p>He took refuge in the impersonal speech of earlier days, and with a
grave obstinacy of demeanour resisted the unreasonableness of his nurse.</p>
<p>"What was that noise, Nanny? Do tell me."</p>
<p>"Why a train, of course. There's a molly-coddle. Tut-tut!"</p>
<p>"A train like we rode in from down in the country?"</p>
<p>"Yes, a train like we rode in from down in the country!" Nurse mimicked
him in an outrageous falsetto.</p>
<p>"Not lions at all?"</p>
<p>"Not if you're a good boy."</p>
<p>"Nor bears—nor tigers—nor wolverines?"</p>
<p>The last was a dreadful importation of fancy from some zoological
gift-book.</p>
<p>"Now that's enough," Nurse decided.</p>
<p>"Nor laughing hyenas?"</p>
<p>"Am I to speak to you again? As if there wasn't enough to do without
children why-why-whying morning, noon and night."</p>
<p>Michael recognized finality of argument. The mention of morning, noon
and night with their dreary suggestion of the infinite and unattainable
plunged him into silence. Nurse, gratified by her victory and relieved
to find that Stella was crooning happy mysteries to a rag doll,
announced that she was prepared in return for the very best behaviour to
push the two cots against the window. This done, she left the children
to their first survey of London airs, to silent wonder amid the cheeping
of countless sparrows.</p>
<p>Stella sat blinking at the light and the sailing clouds. She soon began
to chant her saga. Primitive and immemorial sounds flowed from that dewy
mouth; melodies and harmonies, akin to the day itself, voiced the
progress of the clouds; and while she told her incommunicable delight
there was actually no one to say 'Stella, will you stop that 'umming?'
Michael could not compete with his sister in her interpretation of the
clouds' courses. He had, indeed, tried once or twice; but Stella either
stopped abruptly, leaving him to lag for a while with a lame tune of his
own, or else she would burst into tears. Michael preferred an
inspiration more immediately visual to Stella's incomprehensibly
boundless observations. Michael would enjoy holding in his hand a bunch
of blue cornflowers; Stella would tear them to pieces, not irritably,
but absently in a seclusion of spacious visions. On this occasion
Michael paid no attention to Stella's salutation of light; he was merely
thankful she showed no sign of wishing to be amused by 'peep-bo,' or by
the pulling of curious faces. Both these diversions were dangerous to
Michael's peace of mind, because at some period of the entertainment he
was bound, with disastrous results, to cross the line between Stella's
joy and Stella's fear. Michael turned to look out of the window, finding
the details of the view enthralling. He marked first of all the long row
of poplar trees already fresh and vivid with young May's golden green.
Those trees, waving with their youthfulness in the wind, extended as far
as could be observed on either side. Three in every garden were planted
close to the farthest wall. How beautiful they looked, and how the
sparrows hopped from branch to branch. Michael let his eyes rove along
the pleasant green line whose slightness and evenness caressed the
vision, as velvet might have caressed a hand running lightly over the
surface. Suddenly, with a sharp emotion of shame, Michael perceived that
the middle tree opposite his own window was different from the rest. It
was not the same shape; it carried little blobs such as hang from
tablecloths and curtains; it scarcely showed a complete leaf. Here was a
subject for speculation indeed; and the more Michael looked at the other
trees, the more he grew ashamed for the loiterer. This problem would
worry him interminably: he would return to it often and often. But the
exquisite pleasure he had taken in the trim and equable row was gone;
for as soon as the eye caressed it, there was this intolerably naked
tree to affront all regularity.</p>
<p>After the trees, Michael examined the trellis that extended along the
top of a stuccoed wall without interruption on either side. This trellis
was a curiosity, for if he looked at it very hard, the lozenges of space
came out from their frame and moved about in a blur—an odd business
presumably inexplicable for evermore like everything else. Beyond the
trellis was the railway; and while Michael was looking a signal shot
down, a distant roar drew near, and a real train rumbled past which,
beheld from Michael's window, looked like a toy train loaded with dolls,
one of whom wore a red tam-o'-shanter. Michael longed to be sitting once
again in that moving wonderland and to be looking out of the window,
himself wearing just such another red tam-o'-shanter. Beyond the railway
was surely a very extraordinary place indeed, with mountains of coal
everywhere and black figures roaming about; and beyond this, far far
away, was a very low line of houses with a church steeple against an
enormous sky.</p>
<p>"Dinner-time! Tut-tut," said Nurse, suddenly bustling into the room to
interrupt Stella's saga and Michael's growing dread of being left alone
in that wilderness beyond the railway lines.</p>
<p>"Could I be left there?" he asked.</p>
<p>"Left where?"</p>
<p>"There." He pointed to the coal-yard.</p>
<p>"Don't point!" said Nurse.</p>
<p>"What is that place?"</p>
<p>"The place where coal comes from."</p>
<p>"Could I be left there?" he persisted.</p>
<p>"Not unless one of the coalmen came over the wall and carried you off
and left you there, which he will do unless you're a good boy."</p>
<p>Michael caught his breath.</p>
<p>"Can coalmen climb?" he asked, choking at the thought.</p>
<p>"Climb like kittens," said Nurse.</p>
<p>A new bogey had been created, black and hairy with yellow cat's eyes and
horrid prehensile arms.</p>
<p>Michael and Stella were now lifted out of the cots and dumped on to the
cold oilcloth and marched into the adjacent bathroom, where their faces
and hands were sponged with a new sponge that was not only rough in
itself, but also had something that scratched buried in one of the
pores. During this operation, Nurse blew violent breaths through her
tightly closed lips. When it was over, Stella was lifted up into Nurse's
arms; Michael was commanded to walk downstairs in front and not to let
go of the banisters; then down they went, down and down and down—past
three doors opening into furniture-heaped rooms, past a door with upper
panels of coloured glass in a design of red and amber sparrows upon a
crude blue vegetation—a beautiful door, Michael thought, as he went by.
Down and down and down into the hall which was strewn with bits of straw
and shavings and had another glass-panelled door very gaudy. Here the
floor was patterned with terra-cotta, yellow, black and slate-blue
tiles. Two more doors were passed, and a third door was reached, opening
apparently on a box into which light was let through windows of such
glass as is seen round the bottom of bird-cages. This final staircase
was even in the fullest daylight very dim and eerie, and was permeated
always with a smell of burnt grease and damp cloths. Half-way down
Michael shrunk back against Nurse's petticoats, for in front of him
yawned a terrible cavern exuding chill.</p>
<p>"What's that?" he gasped.</p>
<p>"Bless the boy, he'll have me over!" cried Nurse.</p>
<p>"Oh, Nanny, what is it—that hole? Michael doesn't like that hole."</p>
<p>"There's a milksop. Tut-tut! Frightened by a coal-cellar! Get on with
you, do."</p>
<p>Michael, holding tightly to the banisters, achieved the ground and was
hustled into the twilight of the morning-room. Stella was fitted into
her high chair; the circular tray was brought over from behind and
thumped into its place with a click: Michael was lifted up and thumped
down into another high chair and pushed close up to the table so that
his knees were chafed by the sharp edge and his thighs pinched by a
loose strand of cane. Nurse, blowing as usual through closed lips, cut
up his meat, and dinner was carried through in an atmosphere of greens
and fat and warm, milk-and-water and threats of Gregory-powder, if every
bit were not eaten.</p>
<p>Presently the tramping of furniture-men was renewed and the
morning-room, was made darker still by the arrival of a second van which
pulled up at right angles to the first. In the course of dinner, Cook
entered. She was a fat masculine creature who always kept her arms
folded beneath a coarse and spotted apron; and after Cook came Annie the
housemaid, tall and thin and anæmic. These two watched the children
eating, while they gossiped with Nurse.</p>
<p>"Isn't Mrs. Fane coming at all, then?" enquired Cook.</p>
<p>"For a few minutes—for a few minutes," said Nurse quickly, and Michael
would not have been so very suspicious had he not observed the nodding
of her head long after there was any need to nod it.</p>
<p>"Is mother going to stay with us?" he asked.</p>
<p>"Stay? Stay? Of course she'll stay. Stay for ever," asserted Nurse in
her bustling voice.</p>
<p>"Funny not to be here when the furniture came," said Cook.</p>
<p>"Yes, wasn't it?" echoed Annie. "It <i>was</i> funny. That's what I thought.
How funny, I thought."</p>
<p>"Not that I suppose things will be what you might call properly arranged
just yet?" Cook speculated.</p>
<p>"Everything arranged. Everything arranged," Nurse snapped. "Nothing to
arrange. Nothing to arrange."</p>
<p>And as if to stifle for ever any ability in Michael to ask questions,
she proceeded to cram his mouth with a dessert-spoonful of rice pudding
from her own plate, jarring his teeth with the spoon when she withdrew
it.</p>
<p>Then Michael's lovely mother in vivid rose silk came into the room, and
Cook squeezed herself backwards through the door very humbly and so
quietly that Annie found herself alone before she realized the fact; so
that in order to cover her confusion and assist her retreat she was
compelled to snatch away Michael's plate of rice pudding before he had
finished the last few clotted grains. Michael was grateful to Annie for
this, and he regarded her from that moment as an ally. Thenceforth he
would often seek her out in what she called 'her' pantry, there to
nibble biscuits, while Annie dried cups and swung them from brass hooks.</p>
<p>"How cosy you all look," said mother. "Darling Stella, are you enjoying
your rice pudding? And, darling Michael," she added, "I hope you're
being very good."</p>
<p>"Oh, yes," said Nurse, "Good! Yes. He's very good. Oh, yes. Tut-tut!
Tut-tut!"</p>
<p>After this exhalation of approval Nurse blew several breaths, leaned
over him, pulled down his blue and white sailor-top, and elevated his
chin with the back of her hand.</p>
<p>"There's no need to bother about the drawing-room or the dining-room or
my bedroom or, in fact, any of the rooms except the night-nursery and
the day-nursery. You're quite straight in here. I shall be back by the
end of June."</p>
<p>Nurse shook her head very violently at this, and Michael felt tears of
apprehension welling up into his eyes. Mrs. Fane paused a moment
doubtfully; then she waved beautiful slim gloves and glided from the
room. Michael listened to delicate footsteps on the stairs, and the
tinkle of small ornaments. A bleak silence followed the banging of the
front door.</p>
<p>"She's gone away. I know she's gone away," he moaned.</p>
<p>"Who's She?" demanded Nurse. "She's the cat's mother."</p>
<p>"Mother! Mother!" he wailed. "She always goes away from Michael."</p>
<p>"And no wonder," said Nurse. "Dear, dear! Yes—tut-tut!—but goodness
gracious, she won't be gone long. She'll be back in June."</p>
<p>"What's June?" Michael asked.</p>
<p>"If you ask any more silly questions you'll go to bed, young man; but if
you're a good boy, I'll tell you a story."</p>
<p>"A real story? A nice long story?" asked Michael.</p>
<p>"I'll tell you a story about Jack o' my Nory And now my story's begun.
I'll tell you another about Jack and his brother And now my story's
done."</p>
<p>Nurse twiddled her thumbs with a complacent look, as she smacked her
palate upon the final line.</p>
<p>"That isn't a story," said Michael sullenly. "When will mother be back?"</p>
<p>"In June. That's enough," said Nurse.</p>
<p>Michael went to sleep that night, trying to materialize this mysterious
June. It came to mean a distant warmth of orange light towards which he
waited very slowly. He lay awake thinking of June in the luminousness of
a night-light shielded from his direct vision by a basin. His hands were
muffled in fingerless gloves to prevent thumb-sucking. Suddenly upon the
quiet came a blaze of light. Had he reached June? His sleepy eyelids
uncurled to the scented vision of his beautiful mother. But it was only
gaslight playing and fluttering over the figure of anæmic Annie taking
hairpin after hairpin from her hair. Yet there was a certain interest in
watching Annie undress. Her actions were less familiar than those of
Nurse. Her lips were softer to kiss. Then the vision of June, rising and
falling with Annie's breath, recurred from distances unattainable, faded
again into the blackness of the night, and after a while came back
dazzling and golden. It was morning, and in a chirping of sparrows and
depth of quiet sunlight Michael began to wonder why he was sleeping
beside Annie in a big bed. It was an experience that stood for a long
time in his memory as the first adventure of his life.</p>
<p>The adventure of Annie was a solitary occasion. By the following night
the regular night-nursery was ready for occupation, and the pea-green
vegetation of the walls was hidden by various furniture. Nurse's bed
flanked by the two cots occupied much of its space. Round the fire was a
nursery fender on which hung perpetually various cloths and clothes and
blankets and sheers which, as it was summer at the time, might all have
been dried much more easily out of doors. Pictures were hung upon the
wall—pictures that with the progress of time became delightfully
intimate experiences. They were mostly framed chromolithographs saved
from the Christmas numbers of illustrated papers. There was Cherry
Ripe—a delicious and demure girl in a white dress with a pink sash, for
whom Michael began to feel a romantic affection. There was the picture
of a little girl eating a slice of bread-and-butter on a doorstep,
watched by a fox terrier and underneath inscribed 'Give me a piece,
please.' Michael did not know whether to feel more sorry for the little
girl or the dog; some sort of compassion, he thought, was demanded. It
was a problem picture insoluble over many years of speculation. The
night-nursery seemed always full of Nurse's clothes. Her petticoats were
usually chequered or uniform red, preternaturally bright in contrast
with the blackness of the exterior apparel. The latter of heavy serge or
similar material was often sown with jet bugles which scratched
Michael's face when he played 'Hide-Oh' among the folds of such obvious
concealment. Apart from these petticoats and skirts, the most individual
possession of Nurse's wardrobe was a moon-shaped bustle of faded crimson
which Michael loved to swing from the bedpost whence out of use it was
suspended. There was also in a top drawer, generally unattainable, a
collection of caps threaded with many different velvet ribbons and often
coquettish with lace flowers. Michael was glad when Nurse put on her
best cap, a proceeding which took place just before tea. Her morning cap
was so skimpy as scarcely to hide the unpleasant smoothness of her thin
hair. In the amber summer afternoons or blue spring twilights, Nurse
looked comparatively beautiful under the ample lace, with a softer apron
and a face whose wrinkles were smoothed out by the consciousness of
leisure and the pleasant brown teapot. Mostly, Michael was inclined to
compare her with a monkey, so squab was her nose, so long her upper lip,
and such a multitude of deep furrows twisted up her countenance. That
Nurse was ever young, Michael could not bring himself to believe, and
daguerreotypes framed in tin-foil which she produced as evidence of
youth from a square box inlaid with mother-o'-pearl, never convinced him
as a chromolithograph might have convinced him. At the same time the
stories of her childhood, which Nurse was sometimes persuaded to tell,
were very enthralling; moreover, by the fact of her obvious antiquity,
they had the dimness and mystery of old fairy-tales.</p>
<p>On the whole Michael was happy in his pea-green nursery. He was well
guarded by the iron soldiers of his cot. He liked the warmth and the
smallness of the room; he liked to be able to climb from his cot on to
Nurse's bed, from Nurse's bed into Stella's cot, and with this expanse
of safe territory he felt sorry for the chilly and desolate and
dangerous floor. Michael also liked the day-nursery. To begin with, it
possessed a curious and romantic shape due to its nearness to the roof.
The ceiling sloped on either side of the window almost to the floor. It
was not a room that was square and obvious, for round the corner from
the door was a fairly large alcove which was not destined to lose its
romance for many years. The staircase that led up to the day-nursery was
light and cheerful owing to the skylight in the roof. Yet this skylight
Michael could have wished away. It was a vulnerable spot which made the
day-nursery just a little uneasy at dusk—this and the cistern cupboard
with its dark boomings and hammerings and clankings and utter
inexplicableness. However, the day-nursery was a bright room, with a
cosy atmosphere of its own. The pleasantest meal of the day was taken
there, and in a black cupboard lived the golden syrup and the heraldic
mugs and the dumpy teapot and the accessories of tea. What a much
pleasanter cupboard this was than the smaller one in the night-nursery
which revealed, when opened, slim and ugly ipecacuanha, loathsome
Gregory-powder with wooden cap and squat cork, wicked envelopes of grey
powders and slippery bottles of castor-oil. There, too, was the
liver-coloured liquorice-powder, the vile rhubarb and the deceitful
senna. In fact, apart from a bag of jaded acid-drops, there were only
two pleasant inmates of this cupboard—the silvery and lucent syrup of
squills and a round box of honey and borax. There were no pills because
Nurse objected to pills. She was always telling Michael as he listened,
sick at heart, to the stirring-up of the Gregory-powder with a muffled
spoon, so different from the light-hearted tinkle and quick fizz of
magnesia, to be thankful he was not on the verge of taking a pill. That
she represented as something worthy of a struggle. Michael imagined the
taking of a pill to be equivalent to swallowing a large painted ball
full of a combination of all the nastiest medicines in the world. Even
the omnipotent, omniscient Nanny could not take a pill.</p>
<p>There were other jolly cupboards in the day-nursery—one in particular
pasted over with 'scraps' and varnished—a work of art that was always
being added to for a treat. There was a patchwork hearthrug very
comfortable to lie upon beside the cat and her two black kittens. There
was Nanny's work-table in the window, gay with coloured silks and wools.
There was a piano locked up until Michael's first lesson, but
nevertheless wonderful on account of the smooth curve of the lid that
allowed one moment's delicious balance and then an equally delicious
slide on to the floor.</p>
<p>Certainly the day-nursery was the best room in the tall thin house, just
as the morning-room was the worst. The morning-room was odious. In it
were eaten breakfast and dinner, both nasty meals. Near it was the
coal-cellar and the area-door with its grinning errand boys. The windows
afforded foothold to strange cats that stared abominably with yellow
eyes. Tramps and sweeps walked past the area-railings or looked in
evilly. Horrid gipsies smirked through the window, and pedlars often
tapped. The morning-room was utterly abominable, fit only for the boiled
mutton and caper sauce and suet puddings that loaded its table.</p>
<p>The kitchen, although it was next to the morning-room, was a far
pleasanter resort. So far as any ground-floor now could be considered
safe, the kitchen was safe. It looked out upon its own fortified
basement whose perforated iron staircase had a spiked door at the top,
which could be securely shut. The kitchen contained a large number of
objects of natural interest, among which was a shallow cupboard that
included upon an attainable shelf jars of currants, sultanas, and rice
much more edible in the raw state than cooked. There was the
electric-bell case, recording with mysterious discs a far-off summons.
There was the drawer in the kitchen table that contained, besides knives
and forks, a rolling-pin, a tin-opener, a corkscrew, skewers and, most
exciting of all, a club-shaped cage for whipping eggs. There was also a
deep drawer in the dresser which held many revelations of the private
history of Annie and Cook. Michael could easily have spent days in the
kitchen without exhausting its treasures, and as for Cook, gross though
she was and heavily though she smelt of onions and beer, her tales were
infinitely superior to anything ever known in the way of narration.</p>
<p>Towards the end of June, Mrs. Fane came back. Her arrival was heralded
by the purchase of several pots of marguerites and calceolarias—the
latter to Michael a very objectionable flower because, detecting in it
some resemblance to his dearly loved snapdragons, he pressed open the
mouth of a flower and, finding inside a small insect, had to drop the
whole pot in a shudder. This brought the punishment of not being allowed
to watch from the steps for his mother's cab rounding the corner into
Carlington Road, and made calceolarias for ever hateful. However, Mrs.
Fane arrived in the richness of a midsummer twilight, and Michael forgot
all about calceolarias in his happiness. All day long for many golden
days he pattered up and down the house and in and out of all the rooms
at his mother's heels. He held coils of picture-wire and hooks and
hammers and nails and balls of wool and reels of silk and strands of
art-muslin and spiders of cotton-wool and Japanese fans and plumes of
pampas grass and all the petty utilities and beauties of house
arrangement. By the end of July every room was finally arranged, and
Michael and Stella with their mother, accompanied by Nurse and Annie,
went down to the seaside to spend two wonderful months. Michael was
often allowed to sit up an extra half-hour and even when he went to bed
his mother would come to hear him say his prayers. She would sit by him,
her lovely face flushed by the rose-red August sunsets that floated in
through the open window on a sound of sea-waves. As it grew darker and,
over the noise of happy people walking about in the cool evening, a
distant band played music, his mother would lean over and kiss him good
night. He would be loath to let her go, and just as she was closing the
door quietly he would call her back and whisper 'One more kiss,' and
because that good-night kiss was the most enchanting moment in his day,
he would whisper as he held her to him very close, 'Only one more, but
much, much, much the longest kiss in all the world.'</p>
<p>They were indeed two very wonderful months. In the morning Michael would
sit beside his mother at breakfast, and for a great treat he would be
given the segment she so cleverly cut off from the tip of her egg. And
for another treat, he would be allowed to turn the finished egg upside
down and present it to her as a second untouched, for which she would be
very grateful and by whose sudden collapse before the tapping of the
spoon, she would be just as tremendously surprized. After the egg would
always come two delicious triangles of toast, each balancing a single
strawberry from the pot of strawberry jam. After breakfast, Michael
would walk round the heap of clinkers in the middle of the parched
seaside garden while his mother read her letters, and very soon they
would set out together to the beach, where in time they would meet Nurse
and Stella with the perambulator and the camp-stools and the bag of
greengages or William-pears. Sand castles were made and boats were
sailed or rather were floated upside down in pools, and just as the
morning was getting too good to last, they would have to go home to
dinner, joining on to the procession of people returning up the cliffs.
Michael would be armed with a spade, a boat with very wet sails, and
sometimes with a pail full of sea-water and diminutive fish that died
one by one in the course of the afternoon heat. After dinner Mrs. Fane
would lie down for a while, and Michael would lie down for a great treat
beside her and keep breathless and still, watching the shadows of light
made by the bellying of the blind in the breeze. Bluebottles would
drone, and once to his bodeful apprehension a large spider migrated to
another corner of the ceiling. But he managed to restrain himself from
waking his mother.</p>
<p>One afternoon Michael was astonished to see on the round table by the
bed the large photograph in a silver frame of a man in knee-breeches
with a sword—a prince evidently by his splendid dress and handsome
face. He speculated during his mother's sleep upon this portrait, and
the moment Annie had left the cup of tea which she brought in to wake
his mother Michael asked who the man was.</p>
<p>"A friend of mine," said Mrs. Fane.</p>
<p>"A prince?"</p>
<p>"No, not a prince."</p>
<p>"He looks like a prince," said Michael sceptically.</p>
<p>"Does he, darling?"</p>
<p>"I think he does look like a prince. Is he good?"</p>
<p>"Very good."</p>
<p>"What's wrote on it?" Michael asked. "Oh, mother, when will I read
writing?"</p>
<p>"When you're older."</p>
<p>"I wish I was older now. I want to read writing. What's wrote on it?"</p>
<p>"Always," his mother told him.</p>
<p>"Always?"</p>
<p>"Yes."</p>
<p>"Always what? Always good?"</p>
<p>"No, just plain 'always,'" said Mrs. Fane.</p>
<p>"What a funny writing. Who wrote it?"</p>
<p>"The man in the picture."</p>
<p>"Why?"</p>
<p>"To please mother."</p>
<p>"Shall I write 'always' when I can write?" he asked.</p>
<p>"Of course, darling."</p>
<p>"But what is that man for?"</p>
<p>"He's an old friend of mother's."</p>
<p>"I like him," said Michael confidently.</p>
<p>"Do you, darling?" said his mother, and then suddenly she kissed him.</p>
<p>That evening when Michael's prayers were concluded and he was lying very
still in his bed, he waited for his mother's tale.</p>
<p>"Once upon a time," she began, "there was a very large and enormous
forest——"</p>
<p>"No, don't tell about a forest," Michael interrupted. "Tell about that
man in the picture."</p>
<p>Mrs. Fane was staring out of the window, and after a moment's hesitation
she turned round.</p>
<p>"Because there <i>are</i> fairy-tales without a prince," said Michael
apologetically.</p>
<p>"Well, once upon a time," said his mother, "there lived in an old old
country house three sisters whose mother had died when they were quite
small."</p>
<p>"Why did she die?"</p>
<p>"She was ill."</p>
<p>Michael sighed sympathetically.</p>
<p>"These three sisters," his mother went on, "lived with their father, an
old clergyman."</p>
<p>"Was he kind to them?"</p>
<p>"According to his own ideas he was very kind. But the youngest sister
always wanted to have her own way and one day when she was feeling very
cross because her father had told her she was to go and stay with an
aunt, who should come riding along a lane but——"</p>
<p>"That man," interrupted Michael, greatly excited.</p>
<p>"A rider on horseback. And he said good morning, and she said good
morning, though she had no business to."</p>
<p>"Why hadn't she?"</p>
<p>"Because it isn't right for girls to speak to riders on horseback
without being introduced. But the rider was very handsome and brave and
after that they met very often, and then one day he said, 'Won't you
ride away with me?' and she rode away with him and never saw her father
or her sisters or the old house any more."</p>
<p>Mrs. Fane had turned her face to the sunset again.</p>
<p>"Is that all?" Michael asked.</p>
<p>"That's all."</p>
<p>"Was they happy ever afterwards?"</p>
<p>"Very happy—too happy."</p>
<p>"Are they happy now?"</p>
<p>"Very happy—too happy."</p>
<p>"Did they live in a castle?"</p>
<p>"Sometimes, and sometimes they lived in a beautiful ship and went
sailing away to the most beautiful cities in the world."</p>
<p>"Can't Michael go with you?" he asked.</p>
<p>"Darling boy, it's a fairy-tale."</p>
<p>"Is it?" he said doubtfully.</p>
<p>The two wonderful months were over. One long day of packing up was the
end of them, and when they got back to London there was more packing up,
after a few days of which Mrs. Fane took Michael in her arms and kissed
him good-bye and told him to be very good. Michael tried not to cry; but
the tears were forced out by a huge lump in his throat when he saw a cab
at the door, pointing the other way from London. He could not bear the
heaped-up luggage and Nurse's promises of sitting up late that evening
for a great treat. He did not want to sit up late, and when his mother
whispered there was a surprize for him in the drawing-room, he did not
care at all for a surprize. But nothing could make the minutes stay
still. He was allowed to watch the cab going down the road, but he had
no heart to wave his handkerchief in farewell, and when presently he
went back with Nurse into the thin red house and was triumphantly led
into the drawing-room, he was not raised to any particular happiness by
the lancer's uniform, displayed on a large square of cardboard. He
suffered himself to be dressed up and to have the scarlet breast-plate
strapped around him and the plumed helmet to be pushed over his nose and
the sabre-tache to be entangled with his legs; but there was no spirit
of hope and adventure flaming in his breast—only an empty feeling and a
desire to look out of the night-nursery window at the trains going by
with happy people inside.</p>
<h3><a id="Chapter_II_Bittersweet" name="Chapter_II_Bittersweet"></a>Chapter II: <i>Bittersweet</i></h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">H</span>IS mother's absence made very sad for Michael the tall thin house in
Carlington Road. He felt enclosed in the restraint from which his mother
had flown like a bird. Time stretched before him in unimaginable
reckonings. It was now the beginning of autumn, and the leaves of the
lime trees, falling to lie stained and unlovely in sodden basements,
moved Michael with a sense of the long winter before him, with the
unending black nights and the dark wet dawns. From the window of the
night-nursery he recognized for the first time the beauty of the
unsymmetrical plane tree that now, when the poplars were mere swishing
bundles of twigs, still defied the October winds with wide green leaves.
Soon, however, by a damp frost the plane tree was conquered, and its
blobs jigged to November gusts. Fogs began, and the morning-room was
always gaslit, even for dinner at one o'clock. Stella was peevish, and
games became impossible. The two black kittens were an entertainment and
took part with Michael in numberless dramas of revenge and punishment,
of remorse and exaggerated cherishing. These histrionic pastimes became
infused with a terrible reality, when one day the favourite kitten
jumped from Michael's arms over the banisters and fell on to the tiled
floor of the hall, hurting herself internally so that she had to be
poisoned. He stood by her grave in the blackened mould of the garden,
and wished poignantly that he had never spoken harshly to her, had never
banished her to a waste-paper basket prison for the length of a long
foggy afternoon.</p>
<p>Christmas arrived with more uniforms, with a fishmonger's shop and a
mechanical mackerel which when wound up would click in finny progress
from one end of the bath to the other and back. It was wound up every
Sunday afternoon for a treat, and was afterwards replaced in a high
corner-cupboard that always attracted Michael's extreme curiosity and
was the object of many vows to solve its secret, when he grew bigger.
All these presents came from his mother together with half a dozen
books. He received no other presents except from the household. Nurse
gave him a china house, romantic when illuminated by a night-light;
Annie shyly placed before him a crystal globe that when shaken gave a
wonderful reproduction of a snow-storm falling upon a weather-worn tin
figure with a green face, blue legs and an unpainted coat. Mrs. Frith
the cook gave him a box of tops, none of which he or she or anyone else
could spin. In addition to these presents Santa Claus allowed him on a
still December night an orange, an apple, a monkey on a stick, five nuts
(three of them bad) and a selection of angular sweets. As Michael with
foresight had hung up two of Nurse's stockings as well as his own socks,
he felt slightly resentful towards Santa Claus for the meagre response.</p>
<p>Christmas passed away in a week of extravagant rain, and a visit was
paid to the pantomime of Valentine and Orson at the Surrey Theatre that
reduced Michael to a state of collapse owing to the fight between the
two protagonists, in which Orson's fingers were lacerated by the
glittering sword of Valentine. Nurse vainly assured him the blood was so
much red paint. He howled the louder and dreamed ghastly dreams for a
month afterwards.</p>
<p>About this time Michael read many books in a strange assortment. Nurse
had a collection of about a dozen in her trunk from which Michael was
allowed to read three to himself. These were The Lamplighter, The
Arabian Nights in a small paper-bound volume of diminutive print, and a
Tale of the Black Rising in Jamaica which included an earthquake. In The
Arabian Nights he read over and over again the stories of Aladdin, The
Forty Thieves and Sinbad, owing to their familiarity through earlier
narratives. On Sunday afternoons Nurse always read aloud from
Baring-Gould's Lives of the Saints and Mrs. Gatti's Parables from
Nature, and told the story of Father Machonochie's death in Argyll and
of his faithful Skye terriers, whose portraits she piously possessed in
Oxford frames. Michael's own books included at this period several
zoological works, the Swiss Family Robinson, Holiday House,
Struwwelpeter, Daddy Darwin's Dovecote, Jackanapes, The Battles of the
British Army and an abbreviated version of Robinson Crusoe.</p>
<p>The winter and cold wet spring dragged by. Day by day life varied very
little. In the morning after breakfast, if it was fairly fine, a visit
would be paid to Kensington Gardens, a dull business; for the Round Pond
was not visited, and indeed the Gardens were only penetrated as far as
the Palace, with occasional promenades along the flower-walk for a
treat. Treats were important factors in Michael's life. Apparently
anything even mildly pleasant came under the category of treats. It was
a treat to walk on the grass in the Gardens; it was a treat to help to
push Stella's perambulator; it was a treat to have the sponge floating
beside him in the bath, to hum, to laugh, to read, to stay up one minute
after half-past six, to accompany Nurse on her marketing, and most of
all to roll the slabs of unbaked dough down in the kitchen. The great
principle of a treat was its rarity. As anything that had to be asked
for became a treat automatically and as the mere fact of asking was made
a reason for refusing to grant a treat, the sacred infrequency of the
treat was secured. The result of this was that the visit to Kensington
Gardens instead of being the jolly business it seemed to be for other
children, became a tantalizing glimpse of an unattainable paradise.
Michael would stand enraptured by the March winds, every impulse bidding
him run and run eternally through the blowy spring weather; yet if he so
much as climbed the lowest rung of the scaly part-railings, if he
dallied one moment to watch a kite launched on the air, Nanny would haul
him back to the perambulator's side. As for talking to other children,
not even could the magic treat effect that. If Nurse was to be believed,
conversation with strange children was the lowest depth to which human
nature could sink. The enforced solitariness of his life bred in Michael
a habit of contemplation. Much of his morning walk was passed in a
dream, in which he seemed to be standing still while the world of houses
and trees and railings and people swam by him unheeded. This method of
existence led to several unpleasant shocks, as when he walked into a
lamp-post and bruised his nose. Nanny used to jeer at him, calling him
Little Johnny Head-in-air; but Michael was so much used to her
derogatory opinions that he cared very little and made no attempt to
cure himself of the habit, but even encouraged himself to put himself
into these nihilistic trances.</p>
<p>It was probably owing to this habit that one morning Michael, looking
round in Kensington Gardens, could discern no familiar figure. He was by
himself in the middle of a broad gravel walk. Nurse and the perambulator
had vanished. For a moment a sickening horror seized him. He would never
see Carlington Road again; he would never see Stella or his mother; he
would never go to the seaside; he was lost. Then he recalled to himself
the knowledge of his name and address: he reassured himself by repeating
both aloud, Charles Michael Saxby Fane, 64 Carlington Road, Kensington.
A name and address he had often been warned was a talisman to enlist
the service of policemen. His heart beat more gently again; his
breathing became normal. He looked around him at the world seen for the
first time with freedom's eyes. With waves of scent the beds of
hyacinths impressed themselves upon his memory. He was free under a
great gusty sky, free to climb railings, to pick up shells from the
gravel walk, to lie on his back in the grass and brood upon the huge
elm-trees that caught the clouds in their net. Michael wandered along to
a drinking-fountain to which, access had often been forbidden. He drank
four cups of water from the captive metal mug: he eyed curiously the
many children who, as free as himself, ran up and down the steps of the
fountain. He wished for barley-sugar that he might offer it to them and
earn their approbation and company. He was particularly attracted to one
group consisting of three funny little girls with splashed pinafores and
holes in their stockings, and of two little boys with holes in their
knickerbockers and half-peeled sticks. The group moved away from the
fountain and Michael followed at a distance. The group turned
somersaults over the highest railings and Michael watched it hungrily.
The group strolled on, the girls nonchalant and enlaced, the boys still
peeling their sticks with perseverance. Michael squeezed through the
railings, and followed in the group's wake. The two boys finished
peeling their sticks and pushed over in a heap the three little girls.
There was laughter and shouting, and a confusion of pinafores and black
stockings and hair and caps. Michael stood close to them, wide-eyed with
admiration. Suddenly the group realized his propinquity and flocked
together critically to eye him, Michael became self-conscious and turned
away; he heard giggling and spluttering. He blushed with shame and began
to run. In a moment he fell over a turret of grass and the group jeered
openly. He picked himself up and fled towards the gate of the Gardens,
anxious only to escape ridicule. He ran on with beating heart, with
quickening breath and sobs that rose in his throat one after another
like bubbles, breaking because he ran so fast. He was in Kensington High
Street, among the thickening crowds of people. He seemed to hear
pursuing shouts and mocking laughter. At last he saw a policeman whose
tunic he clutched desperately.</p>
<p>"What's all this about?" demanded the constable.</p>
<p>"Please, my name is Charles Michael Saxby Fane and I live at 64
Carlington Road and I want to go home."</p>
<p>Michael burst into tears and the policeman bent over and led him by a
convulsed hand to the police station. There he was seated in a wooden
chair, while various policemen in various states of undress came and
talked kindly to him, and in the end, riding on the shoulder of his
original rescuer, he arrived at the tall thin house from whose windows
Nurse was peering, anxious and monkey-like.</p>
<p>There seemed to be endless talk about his adventure. All day the affair
was discussed, all day he was questioned and worried and scolded and
threatened. Treats faded from possible granting for months to come.
Restrictions and repressions assumed gigantic proportions, and it was
not until Nanny went upstairs to put Stella to bed and left Michael in
the kitchen with Mrs. Frith and Annie that his adventure came to seem a
less terrible breach of natural law. Away from Nurse, the cook and the
housemaid allowed a splendid laxity to gild their point of view.</p>
<p>"Well, what a fuss about nothing," said Mrs. Frith comfortably. "I
declare. And what was <i>she</i> doing? That's what some people would like to
know. You can't lose a child the same as you might lay down a thimble. I
call it very careless."</p>
<p>"Yes. What a shame!" Annie agreed. "Supposing he'd of been run over."</p>
<p>"He might of been run over a dozen times," said Mrs Frith. "It's all
very fine to put all the blame on the poor child, but what was <i>she</i>
doing?"</p>
<p>Then Mrs. Frith closed her right eye, tightened her mouth and very
slowly nodded her head until the most of her pleated chin was buried in
the bib of her apron.</p>
<p>"That's what I thought," said Annie mysteriously.</p>
<p>"What did you think, Annie?" Michael asked fretfully.</p>
<p>"She thought you hadn't no business to be so daring," said Mrs, Frith.
"But there! Well! And I was daring myself. Very daring <i>I</i> was. Out and
about. Hollering after boys. The slappings I've had. But I enjoyed
myself. And if I sat down a bit tender, that's better than a sore heart,
I used to think."</p>
<p>"I expect you enjoyed yourself," said Annie. "I was one of the quiet
ones, I was. Any little trip, and I was sick."</p>
<p>"Couldn't bear the motion, I suppose?" Cook enquired.</p>
<p>"Oh, it wasn't the travelling as did it. It was the excitement. I was
dreadfully sick in the crypt of St. Paul's Cathedral."</p>
<p>"What a grand place it is, though," said Mrs. Frith, nodding. "Oh,
beautiful. So solemn. I've sat there with my late husband, eating nuts
as peaceful as if we was in a real church. Beautiful. And that
whispering gallery! The things you hear. Oh—well. I like a bit of fun,
I do. I remember——"</p>
<p>Then Nurse came downstairs, and Michael was taken up to bed away from
what he knew would be an enthralling conversation between Annie and
Cook. It was hateful to be compelled to march up all those stairs
farther and farther away from the cheerful voices in the basement.</p>
<p>August arrived without bringing Michael's mother, and he did not care
for the days by the sea without her. Stella, to be sure, was beginning
to show signs of one day being an intelligent companion, but Nurse under
the influence of heat grew more repressive than ever, and the whole
seaside ached with his mother's absence. Michael was not allowed to
speak to strange children and was still dependent on rare treats to
illuminate his dulness. The landlady's husband, Mr. Wagland, played the
harmonium and made jokes with Nurse, while Mrs. Wagland sang hymns and
whispered with Nurse. A gleam of variety came into Michael's life when
Mr. Wagland told him he could catch birds by putting salt on their
tails, and for many afternoons, always with a little foolscap of salt,
Michael walked about the sunburnt-grass patch in front of the house,
waiting for sparrows to perch and vainly flinging pinches of salt in the
direction of their tails.</p>
<p>Church was more exciting by the seaside than at home, where every Sunday
morning during the long sermon Michael subsided slowly from a wooden
bench in the gallery on to a disembowelled hassock, or languished
through the Litany with a taste of varnish in his mouth caused by an
attempt to support his endurance by licking the back of the pew in
front. Nurse told him of wonderful churches with music and incense and
candles and scarlet and lace, but, for some reason of inexplicable
contrariness, she took Michael to an old Calvinistic church with a
fire-breathing vicar, a sniffling vicar's wife and a curate who
sometimes clasped Michael's head with a damp hand that always felt as if
it were still there when it had long been removed, like a cold linseed
poultice. Now at the seaside, Michael went to a beautiful church and was
so much excited by the various events that he pressed forward, peering
on tiptoe. Luckily the two ladies in front of him were so devout and
bobbed up and down so often that he was able to see most of what was
happening. How he longed to be the little boy in scarlet who carried a
sort of silver sauce-boat and helped to spoon what looked like brown
sugar into the censer. Once during a procession, Michael stepped out
into the aisle and tried to see what actually was carried in the boat.
But the boat-boy put out his tongue very quickly, as he walked piously
by, and glared at Michael very haughtily, being about the same size.</p>
<p>After submitting without pleasure to a farewell kiss from Mrs. Wagland,
and after enduring much shame on account of Stella's behaviour in the
crowded railway carriage, Michael came back to Carlington Road. During
the space between arrival and bed-time he was gently happy in welcoming
his toys and books, in marvelling at the quick growth of the black
kitten and in a brief conversation with Mrs. Frith and Annie; but on the
next morning which was wet with a wetness that offered no prospect of
ever being dry, he was depressed by the thought of the long time before
Christmas, by the foreboding of yellow days of fog and the fact that
to-morrow was Sunday. He had been told to sit in the dining-room in
order to be out of the way during the unpacking and, because he had been
slow in choosing which book should accompany him, he had been called Mr.
Particular and compelled to take the one book of all others that he now
felt was most impossible even to open. So Michael sat in the bay-window
and stared at the rainy street. How it rained, not ferociously as in a
summer storm, when the surface of the road was blurred with raindrops
and the water poured along the gutters, carrying twigs and paper and
orange-peel towards the drain, and when there almost seemed a chance of
a second flood, an event Michael did not fear, having made up his mind
to float on an omnibus to the top of the Albert Hall which had once
impressed him with its perfect security. Now it was raining with the
dreary mediocrity of winter, dripping from the balcony above on to the
sill below, trickling down the window-panes, lying in heavy puddles
about the road, a long monotonous grey soak. He sighed as he looked out
of the window at the piece of waste ground opposite, that was bordered
in front by a tumble-down fence and surrounded on the three other sides
by the backs of grey houses. A poor old woman was picking groundsel with
a melancholy persistence, and the torn umbrella which wavered above her
bent form made her look like a scarecrow. Presently round the corner a
boy appeared walking very jauntily. He had neither coat nor waistcoat
nor shoes nor stockings, his shirt was open in front, and a large piece
of it stuck out behind through his breeches; but he did not seem to
mind either the rain or his tattered clothes. He whistled as he walked
along, with one hand stuck in his braces and with the other banging the
wooden fence. He went by with tousled hair and dirty face, a glorious
figure of freedom in the rain, Michael envied him passionately, this
untrammelled fence-banging whistling spirit; and for a long time this
boy walked before Michael's aspirations, leading them to his own merry
tune. Michael would often think of this boy and wonder what he was doing
and saying. He made up his mind in the beeswaxed dining-room that it was
better to be a raggle-taggle wanderer than anything else. He watched the
boy disappear round the farther corner, and wished that he could
disappear in such company round corner after corner of the world beyond
the grey house-backs.</p>
<p>The climax of this wet morning's despair was reached when a
chimney-sweep came into sight, whooping and halloaing nearer and nearer.
Of the many itinerant terrors that haunted polite roads, Michael dreaded
sweeps most of all. So he hastily climbed down from the chair in the
window and sat under the dining-room table until the sound had passed,
shivering with apprehension lest it should stop by Number Sixty-four. It
went by, however, without pausing, and Michael breathed more freely, but
just as he was cautiously emerging from the table, there was an extra
loud postman's knock which drove him back in a panic, so that when
Nurse came fussing in to fetch him to wash his hands for dinner, he had
to invent a plausible excuse for such a refuge. As he could not find
one, he was told that for a punishment he could not be allowed to hear
the message his mother had written at the end of what was evidently a
very important letter, to judge by the many tut-tuts the reading of it
provoked Nurse to click.</p>
<p>However, under the influence of tea Nanny softened, and the message was
read just as the rain stopped and the sun glittered through the
day-nursery window right across the room in a wide golden bar.</p>
<div class="blockquot"><p class="r"><i>Como.</i></p>
<p><i>Darling Michael</i>,</p>
<p class="indt"><i>You are to go to kindergarten which you will enjoy. You will only
go for the mornings and you will have to learn all sorts of jolly
things—music and painting and writing. Then you'll be able to
write to Mother. I'm sure you'll be good and work hard, so that
when Mother comes home at Christmas, you'll be able to show her
what a clever boy she has. You would like to be in this beautiful
place. As I write I can see such lovely hills and fields and lakes
and mountains. I hope darling Stella is learning to say all sorts
of interesting things. I can't find any nice present to send you
from here, so I've told Nanny that you and she can go and buy two
canaries, one for you and one for Stella—a boy canary and a girl
canary. Won't that be fun? Love and kisses from</i></p>
<p class="r"><i>Mother</i>.</p></div>
<p>Michael sat in a dream when the letter was finished. It had raised so
many subjects for discussion and was so wonderful that he could scarcely
speak.</p>
<p>"Will mother really come home at Christmas?" he asked.</p>
<p>"You heard what I said."</p>
<p>"Christmas!" he sighed happily.</p>
<p>"Aren't you glad to go to school?" Nurse wanted to know.</p>
<p>"Yes, but I'd like Christmas to come," he said.</p>
<p>"Was there ever in this world anyone so hard to please?" Nurse
apostrophized.</p>
<p>"When will we go to get these canaries, Nanny?"</p>
<p>"Plenty of time. Plenty of time."</p>
<p>"Soon, will we?"</p>
<p>"One more question and there'll be no canaries at all," said Nurse.</p>
<p>However, the sun shone so brightly, and the prospect of a visit to
Hammersmith Broadway on a Saturday afternoon appealed so strongly to
Nurse that she put on her bonnet and trotted off with Michael up
Carlington Road, and stopped a red omnibus, and fussed her way into it,
and held the tickets in her mouth while she put away her purse, and told
Michael not to fidget with his legs and not to look round behind him at
what was passing on that side of the road, until at last they arrived.
The canary-shop was found, and two canaries and a bird-cage were bought,
together with packets of seed and a bird's bath and a pennyworth of
groundsel and plantains. Nurse told Michael to wait in the shop while
the birds were being prepared for travelling, and while she herself went
to the chemist to buy a remedy for the neuralgia which she prophesied
was imminent. Michael talked to the canary-man and asked a lot of
questions which the canary-man seemed very glad to answer; and finally
Nurse, looking much better, came back from the chemist with a large
bottle wrapped up in a newspaper. In the omnibus, going home, Michael
never took his eyes from the cage, anxious to see how the birds bore the
jolting. Sometimes they said 'sweet,' and then Michael would say
'sweet,' and a pleasant old lady opposite would say 'sweet,' and soon
all the people inside the omnibus were saying 'sweet,' except Nurse,
who was chewing her veil and making the most extraordinary faces.</p>
<p>It was very exciting to stand on tiptoe in the kitchen while Mrs. Frith
cut the string and displayed the canaries in all the splendour of their
cage.</p>
<p>"Beautiful things," said Mrs. Frith. "I'm that fond of birds."</p>
<p>"Don't they hop!" said Annie. "Not a bit frightened they don't seem, do
they?"</p>
<p>"What are their names?" Mrs. Frith enquired.</p>
<p>Michael thought for a long time.</p>
<p>"What <i>are</i> their names, Mrs. Frith?" he asked at last.</p>
<p>"That's your business," said Cook.</p>
<p>"Why is it?" Michael wanted to know.</p>
<p>"Because they're your birds, stupid."</p>
<p>"One's Stella's."</p>
<p>"Well, Stella isn't old enough to choose for herself. Come along, what
are you going to call them?"</p>
<p>"You call them," said Michael persuasively.</p>
<p>"Well, if they was mine I should call them——" Cook paused.</p>
<p>"What would you?" said Michael, more persuasively than ever.</p>
<p>"I'm blessed if I know. There, Annie, what does anyone call a canary?"</p>
<p>"Don't ask me, I'm sure. No," simpered Annie.</p>
<p>"I shouldn't call them nothing, I shouldn't," Mrs. Frith finally
decided. "It isn't like dogs."</p>
<p>"What's the matter?" said Nurse, bustling into the kitchen. "Has one got
out? Has one got out?"</p>
<p>"I was telling Master Michael here," said Cook, "as how I shouldn't call
neither of them nothing. Not if I was he."</p>
<p>"Call what? Call what?" Nurse asked quickly.</p>
<p>"His new dicky-birds."</p>
<p>"Must have names. Yes. Yes. Must have names. Dick and Tom. Dick and
Tom."</p>
<p>"But one's a girl," Michael objected.</p>
<p>"Can't be changed now. Must be Dick and Tom," Nurse settled, blowing
rapidly as usual.</p>
<p>The decision worried Michael considerably, but as they both turned out
to be hens and laid twenty-three eggs between them next spring, it
ceased to bother him any more.</p>
<p>The Miss Marrows' School and Kindergarten, kept by Miss Marrow and Miss
Caroline Marrow assisted by Miss Hewitt and Miss Hunt, struck Michael as
a very solemn establishment indeed. Although its outward appearance was
merely that of an ordinary house somewhat larger than others on account
of its situation at the corner of Fairfax Terrace, it contained inside a
variety of scholastic furniture that was bound to impress the novice.</p>
<p>At twenty minutes past nine on the first day of the autumn term, Nurse
and Michael stood before a brass plate inscribed</p>
<table border="0" cellpadding="4" cellspacing="0" class="smcap" style="border:1px solid black;padding:2%;" summary="plate">
<tr><td align="center">The Misses Marrow<br/>
School and Kindergarten</td></tr>
</table>
<p class="nind">while a bell still jangled with the news of their arrival. They were
immediately shown into a very small and very stuffy room on the right of
the front door—a gloomy little room, because blinds of coloured beads
shut out the unscholastic world. This room was uncomfortably crowded
with little girls taking off goloshes and unlacing long brown boots,
with little boys squabbling over their indoor shoes, with little girls
chatting and giggling and pushing and bumping, with little boys
shouting and quarrelling and kicking and pulling. A huddled and heated
knot of nurses and nursemaids tried to help their charges, while every
minute more little boys and more little girls and more bigger girls
pushed their way in and made the confusion worse. In the middle of the
uproar Miss Marrow herself entered and the noise was instantly lulled.</p>
<p>"The new boys will wait in here and the new girls will <i>quietly</i> follow
Helen Hungerford down the passage to Miss Caroline's room. Nurses need
not wait any longer."</p>
<p>Then a bell vibrated shrilly. There was a general scamper as the nurses
and the nursemaids and the old boys and the old girls hurried from the
room, leaving Michael and two other boys, both about two years older
than himself, to survey each other with suspicion. The other boys
finding Michael beneath the dignity of their notice spoke to each other,
or rather the larger of the two, a long-bodied boy with a big head and
vacant mouth, said to the other, a fidgety boy with a pink face, a
frog-like smile and very tight knickerbockers:</p>
<p>"I say, what's your name?"</p>
<p>The pink-faced boy gulped "Edward Ernest Arnott."</p>
<p>"What is it then?" asked the long-bodied boy.</p>
<p>"Arnott is my surname. Edward and Ernest," he gulped again, "are my
Christian names."</p>
<p>"Mine's Vernon Brown. I say, what's your father?"</p>
<p>"A solicitor," said Edward. "What's yours?"</p>
<p>"A cricket—I mean a critic," said Vernon.</p>
<p>"What's that?"</p>
<p>This seemed to upset the long-bodied boy, who replied:</p>
<p>"Coo! Don't you know what a cricket is? I mean critic. You must be a
kid."</p>
<p>Michael thought this was the most extraordinary conversation he had ever
heard. Not even Mrs. Frith and Annie could be so incomprehensible.</p>
<p>"I don't believe you know yourself," said the pink-faced boy, deepening
to crimson.</p>
<p>"Don't I? I bet I do."</p>
<p>"I bet you don't."</p>
<p>"I know better than you anyway."</p>
<p>"So do I than you."</p>
<p>Michael would have found a conversation between two fox-terriers more
intelligible. It ended abruptly, however, with the entrance of Miss
Marrow, who waved them all to follow her to the severity of her own
room. Edward Arnott and Vernon Brown were despatched upstairs to take
their places in the class above the Kindergarten for which Michael was
destined and whither he followed Miss Marrow, wondering at the size and
ugliness of her. Miss Marrow's base was a black bell, on which was set a
black cushion, above which was Miss Marrow's round beetroot-coloured
face. Miss Caroline was like a green curtain through the folds of which
seemed to have burst a red face like her sister's but thinner. Miss
Caroline was pleasanter than Miss Marrow and never shouted, perhaps
because she was never without a cold in the head.</p>
<p>Michael was handed over to the care of Miss Hewitt, the Kindergarten
mistress, who was very kind and very jolly. Michael enjoyed the
Kindergarten. There he learned to write pothooks and hangers and very
soon to write proper letters. He learned to sew alternate red and blue
lines of wool upon a piece of cardboard. He learned to weave bookmarkers
with shining slips of chocolate and yellow paper, and to pleat chequered
mats of the same material: these, when term was over, appeared at the
prize-giving, beautifully enhanced with paper frills cut by the clever
Miss Hewitt. He learned to paint texts and to keep his pencil-box tidy
and to play the treble of a very unmelodious duet with Miss Hunt, in
whose bony fingers his own fingers would from time to time get
entangled. He tried the treble without the bass accompaniment at home
on Stella, but she cried and seemed as Annie, who was in charge, said
'to regular shudder.' Altogether Kindergarten was a pleasure to Michael,
and he found the days went by more quickly, though still far too slowly.</p>
<p>About a week before Christmas his mother came back, and Michael was
happy. All the rooms that were only used when she was at home changed
from bare beeswaxed deserts to places of perfect comfort, so rosy were
the lamp-shades, so sweet was the smell of flowers and so soft and
lovely were his mother's scattered belongings. Christmas Day brought
presents—a box of stone bricks, a rocking-horse, a doll's house for
Stella, boxes of soldiers, a wooden battleship, and books—Hans Andersen
and Grimm and the Old French Fairy-tales. As for the stockings that
year, it was amazing how much managed to get into one stocking and how
deliciously heavy it felt, as it was unhooked from the end of the cot
and plumped down upon the bed in the gaslight of Christmas morning.
There was only one sadness that hung over the festivities—the thought
that his mother would be going away in two days. Boxing Day arrived and
there were ominous open trunks and the scattered contents of drawers.
To-morrow she was going. It was dreadful to think of. Michael was
allowed the bitter joy of helping his mother to pack, and as he stood
seriously holding various articles preparatory to their entombment, he
talked of the summer and heard promises that mother would spend a long
long time with Michael.</p>
<p>"Mother," he said suddenly, "what is my father?"</p>
<p>"What makes you ask that?"</p>
<p>"The boys at Miss Marrow's all ask me that. Have I got a father? Must
boys have fathers? Oh, mother, do tell me," pleaded Michael.</p>
<p>Mrs. Fane seemed worried by this question.</p>
<p>"Your father was a gentleman," she said at last.</p>
<p>"What is a gentleman?"</p>
<p>"A good man, always thoughtful and considerate to others."</p>
<p>"Was that man in the photograph my father?"</p>
<p>"What photograph?" Mrs. Fane parried.</p>
<p>"By your bed at the seaside?"</p>
<p>"I don't remember," she said, "Anyway, your father's dead."</p>
<p>"Is he? Poor man!" said sympathetic Michael.</p>
<p>"And now run to Nanny and ask her if she remembers where mother put her
large muff."</p>
<p>"Nanny," said Michael, when he had received Nurse's information, "why
did my father die?"</p>
<p>"Die? Die? What questions. Tut-tut! Whatever next?" And Nurse blew very
violently to show how deeply she disapproved of Michael's
inquisitiveness.</p>
<p>That evening, just when Michael was going to bed, there came a knock at
the door, and a tall fair man was shown into the drawing-room.</p>
<p>"How d'ye do, Mrs. Fane? I've come to ask you if you'll go to the
theatre to-night. Saxby is coming on later."</p>
<p>"Oh, thank you very much, Mr. Prescott, but I really think I must stay
in. You see," she said smilingly, "it's Michael's last night of me for a
long time."</p>
<p>Michael stood gazing at Mr. Prescott, hating him with all his might and
sighing relief at his mother's refusal to go out.</p>
<p>"Oh, Michael won't mind; will you, Michael?"</p>
<p>Nurse came in saying 'Bed-time! Tut-tut-tut! Bed-time!' and Michael's
heart sank.</p>
<p>"There you are," said Mr. Prescott. "Here's Nurse to say it's bed-time.
Now do come, Mrs. Fane."</p>
<p>"Oh, I really think I ought to stay."</p>
<p>"Now what nonsense. Saxby will be furiously disappointed. You must.
Come along, Michael, be a brave chap and tell your mother she's got to
go out; and here's something to square our account."</p>
<p>He pressed a little gold coin into Michael's unwilling hand.</p>
<p>"Would you mind very much, if I went?" his mother asked.</p>
<p>"No," said Michael tonelessly. The room was swimming round him in
sickening waves of disappointment.</p>
<p>"Of course he won't," decided Mr. Prescott boisterously.</p>
<p>While he was being undressed, Nurse asked what he was holding. Michael
showed the half-sovereign.</p>
<p>"Spoiling children," muttered Nanny. "That's for your money-box."</p>
<p>Michael did not care what it was for. He was listening for his mother's
step. She came in, while he lay round-eyed in his cot, and leaned over
to kiss him. He held her to him passionately; then he buried his face in
the bedclothes and, while she rustled away from him, sobbed soundlessly
for a long while.</p>
<p>In the morning he watched her go away until the warm summer-time and
felt abandoned as he walked through the wintry rooms, where lately he
and his mother had sat by the fire. As for the ten-shilling piece, he
thought no more about it. Soon afterwards he fell ill with
whooping-cough, he and Stella together, and the days dragged unendurably
in the stuffy nursery away from school.</p>
<h3><a id="Chapter_III_Fears_and_Fantasies" name="Chapter_III_Fears_and_Fantasies"></a>Chapter III: <i>Fears and Fantasies</i></h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">D</span>URING whooping-cough Michael was sometimes allowed to sit in a room
called the library, which was next to his mother's bedroom on the first
floor and was therefore a dearly loved resort. Here he discovered the
large volume of Don Quixote illustrated by Doré that influenced his
whole life. He would pore over this work for hours, forgetting
everything under a spell of chivalry. He read the tale seriously and
thought it the saddest tale ever known. He wept over the knight's
adventures, and big teardrops would spatter the page. He had not yet
encountered much more than mild teazing at the Kindergarten, that with
the unreasonableness of Nurse and his mother's absence made up the sum
of the incomprehensible crosses which he had to bear. But even these
were enough to make him sympathize with Don Quixote. He perceived that
here was a man intent upon something—he could not understand exactly
what—thwarted always by other people, thwarted and jeered at and even
physically maltreated. Yet he was a man whose room was full of dragons
and fairies, whose counterpane was the adventurous field of little
knights-at-arms, whose curtains were ruffled by dwarfs, whose cupboards
held enchanters. Michael loved the tall thin knight and envied Sancho
Panza.</p>
<p>When whooping-cough was over, and Michael went back to Kindergarten,
Nurse decided that he should sleep by himself in the room next to the
night-nursery. She never explained to Michael her reasons for this step,
and he supposed it to be because lately he had always woken up when she
came to bed. This was not his fault, because Nurse always bumped into
his cot as she came, into the room, shaking it so violently that no one
could have stayed asleep. She used to look at him in a funny way with
angry staring eyes, and when he sometimes spoke she would blow
cheese-scented breath at him and turn away and bump into the washstand.</p>
<p>Everything in this new room was by Michael anticipated with dread. He
would go to bed at half-past six: he would settle down in the wide white
bed that stretched a long way on either side of him: the gas would be
turned down: the door would be left ajar: Nurse's footsteps would
gradually die away and he would be left alone.</p>
<p>The night was divided into two portions of equal horror. First of all he
had to concentrate on closing his mouth when asleep, because Annie had
told him a tale about a woman who slept with her mouth open, the result
of which bad habit was that one night a mouse ran down it and choked
her. Then he had to explore cautiously with his feet the ice-cold end of
the bed, in case he should touch a nest of mice—another likely
occurrence vouched for by Annie. Then outside, various sounds would
frighten him. A dog would howl in the distance: cats would spit and
wail, making Michael wonder whether they were coming through his window
to claw his face. Presently, far up the street, newsboys would cry
hoarsely the details of a murder or suicide. As they passed beneath his
bedroom window their voices would swell to a paralyzing roar, and as the
voices died away round the corner, Michael would be left shaking with
fear. Once he was so frightened by a succession of these murder-shouts
that he got out of bed and crept forth on to the landing, whence he
peered down between the banisters into the quiet red light burning in
the hall far below. While he was leaning over, a door banged suddenly
on the top floor, and Michael fled barefooted down the stairs, until he
reached the cold tiles of the front hall. Should he dare to descend
still lower and disturb Nurse at her supper in the kitchen? Or were they
all lying there, Cook and Annie and Nurse, with their throats cut? The
door leading to the basement stairs was open, and he stole down over the
oilcloth, past the yawning cellar, past the laundry-basket in the
passage, past the cupboard under the stairs, to listen by the kitchen
door. There was a murmur of voices, familiar yet unfamiliar: the kitchen
door was ajar and he peered round stealthily. There was Nurse with a
very red face in a heap on a chair, shaking her forefinger at Mrs.
Frith, who with an equally red face was talking very indistinctly to
Nurse; while between them, bolt upright and very pale, sat Annie
nervously shaving from the cheese very thin segments which she ate from
the knife's edge. They seemed to Michael, as he watched them, like
people in a nightmare, so unreal and horrible were they: they frightened
him more than ever, sitting there nodding at each other in the kitchen
where the blackbeetles ran slyly in and out beneath the fender. Suddenly
Annie saw Michael and waved him back; he turned at her gesture and
withdrew from sight. While he stood shivering in the dark passage, Annie
came out and, picking him up, carried him out of hearing.</p>
<p>"Whatever made you come downstairs?" she panted on the first-floor
landing.</p>
<p>"I was frightened."</p>
<p>"You frightened <i>me</i>."</p>
<p>"Who are they murdering?"</p>
<p>"You've been having a bad dream," said Annie.</p>
<p>She led him upstairs again to his room and tucked him up, and at his
earnest request turned the gas a trifle higher.</p>
<p>"Why did Nanny and Mrs. Frith look like that?" he asked.</p>
<p>"They're tired," said Annie.</p>
<p>"Why?"</p>
<p>"They have to work so hard to look after you."</p>
<p>Then she left him alone, and he fell asleep before they all came up to
bed.</p>
<p>Generally speaking, the first part of the night, however bad the outside
noises, was not so fearful as the second part. Mostly the second portion
of the night was preceded by a bad dream in which Michael's nerves were
so much shaken that he had no courage or common-sense left to grapple
with the long hours in the ghastly stillness of his room. There was one
dream in particular which he dreaded, and indeed it was the only one
that repeated itself at regular intervals without any essential change.
He would find himself alone in a long street in the middle of the night.
Usually it would be shining with wet, but sometimes it would be dry and
airless. This street stretched as far as one could see. It had on either
side lamp-posts which burned with a steady staring illumination, long
rows of lamp-posts that converged in the farthest distance. The houses
all seemed empty, yet everyone was in some way a malignant personality.
Down this street Michael would have to walk on and on. He would meet
nobody, and the only living thing was a bony hound that pattered behind
him at whatever pace he went, whether he ran or whether he loitered. He
would in his dream be filled with a desire to enter one of these houses,
and often he would mount the steps and knock a summons on the door—a
knock that echoed all over the gloom within. While he knocked, the bony
hound would howl in the shadows of the basement. Every house at which he
knocked Michael would be more and more anxious to pass, more and more
fearful to disturb. Yet however much he struggled against it, he would
ultimately be compelled to knock his loud challenge. The street would
now stretch for miles of lighted lamps before and behind him, and the
knowledge would gradually be borne in upon Michael that sooner or later
in one of these grey houses the door would open. He would hurry along,
but however fast he travelled some house would draw him inexorably to
its threshold, and he would wait in agony lest slowly the great door
should swing back to a dim hall. The climax of the dream would now be
reached. One house would simultaneously repel and draw him more than any
of those left behind. He would struggle to go by, but he would find
himself on the steps with legs that refused to carry him away. He would
knock: very slowly the door would swing back and, convulsed and choking
and warding off horror, Michael would wake in a frenzy of fear to his
own real house of ghastly stillness, where no longer did even a belated
luggage-train or jingling hansom assure him of life's continuity.</p>
<p>He did not always wake up suddenly: sometimes he would be aware that he
was slowly waking and would struggle to keep asleep, lying for a long
time without moving a muscle, in order to cheat himself into the belief
that he was not awake. But gradually the strain would be too much and he
would have to become conscious of the room. First of all he would turn
on to his left side and view apprehensively the door ajar. This would
seem to tremble, as he looked, to some invisible hand trying it. Then
along the wall the wardrobe would creak, and every knot of its varnished
surface would take on a fantastic countenance. He would wonder what was
inside, and try to gain comfort and the sense of commonplace daytime
existence by counting the cats swinging on a roundabout in one of Louis
Wain's Christmas pictures. In the corner beyond the wardrobe was a large
clothes-basket that crackled and snapped and must surely hold somebody
inside, hidden as the Forty Thieves were hidden in the oil-jars. The
fire-place, opposite the foot of the bed, seemed a centre for the noise
of mice. How he hoped they would be content to play upon the hearth and
not venture to leap over the fender and scuttle about the room. Then the
door would begin to frighten him again, and Michael would turn very
quietly on to his back, staring at the luminous ceiling where the
gas-jet made a huge moon whose edges wavered perpetually. But the
gas-jet itself became terrifying, when looked at too long, with its
queer blue base and slim solemn shape, so melancholy, so desolate, so
changeless. The ceiling would very soon become unendurable because
various black marks would seem with intensest contemplation more and
more like spiders and beetles. Michael would have to give up lying on
his back and turn upon his right side. He would count each slat of the
Venetian blinds and long passionately and sadly for the grey streaks to
appear at the sides in proclamation of the approach of day. Without
these grey streaks the windows were unbearable, so menacing were they
with the unknown infinite night behind them. The curtains, too, would
quiver, and even Michael's clothes, heaped upon a chair, would assume a
worm-like vitality. The washstand made him feel oppressed, so silent and
white were the jug and basin and soap-dish, so cold and chill were they.
There was nothing to be done but to bury his head beneath the clothes
and, trembling, try to believe in the reality of guardian angels. He
would shut his eyes very tightly until the wheels of coloured lights
thus evoked would circle and revolve, changing their colours in some
mysterious way. These dissolving spots were a great consolation and
passed the time for a little while, until the dread of fire began to
come. He would fling back the clothes in a paroxysm and, heedless of any
other danger, sit up with staring eyes and listening ears and keen
nostrils, dreading and imagining and doubting. Surely he could hear a
crackle; he could smell smoke. The house was on fire; yet not for
anything could he have got out of bed to reassure himself. What might
not be underneath, a burglar, a dead body, a murderer, a skeleton, a mad
dog?</p>
<p>Underneath the clothes he would plunge, and then he would be sure that
someone was coming into the room to smother him. He held his breath,
waiting; with an effort he flung back the clothes again. There was
nothing but the ghastly stillness and the solemn gaslight and the
viewless blinds and the expectant door ajar. The bedposts would now take
on a sort of humanity. They would look at him and wink and shiver. The
wall-paper, normally a pattern of rosebuds and roses, began to move, to
swim with unnatural life. The cistern upstairs began to clank; the bath
began to drip. It must be blood—Nanny had been murdered. The blood was
dripping slowly. Michael choked with horror. Somebody was tapping at the
window-pane, yes, somebody was tapping. It was horrible this endless
tapping. Cats must be coming in. The wardrobe creaked and rapped and
groaned. Some of his clothes slid off the chair on to the floor with a
soft plump; Michael tried to shriek his dismay; but his tongue was dry.
Underneath him a knife was being pushed through the bed. A death-watch
was ticking in the fastness of the wall at his head. A rat was gnawing
his way into the room. Black-beetles were coming up the stairs.</p>
<p>Then along the edge of the Venetian blinds appeared a blue streak. It
widened. It became more luminous. It turned from blue to grey. It turned
from grey to dimmest silver. Hark! 'Cheep, cheep, cheep, cheep!' The
sparrows were beginning. Their chorus rose. Their noise was cool as
water to Michael's fever. An early cart rattled cheerfully down the
road. It was morning.</p>
<h3><a id="Chapter_IV_Unending_Childhood" name="Chapter_IV_Unending_Childhood"></a>Chapter IV: <i>Unending Childhood</i></h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">A</span>FTER whooping-cough came chicken-pox, and it was settled that Michael
should leave the Kindergarten where these illnesses were caught. A
French governess was to teach him every morning and to walk with him
every afternoon. Mrs. Fane wrote to Nurse to tell her of this decision
and to announce that a Madame Flauve would on Monday next arrive at 64
Carlington Road to superintend the education of Michael. This news
reached Nurse on the preceding Friday and threw her into an agitation.
The whole house was turned upside down: curtains were changed; floors
were beeswaxed; furniture was polished; pictures were dusted. All
Saturday and Friday a great cleaning took place, and on Sunday every
cushion was smoothed and patted; chairs were adjusted; mats were shaken;
flowers were distributed, until in the evening Nurse and Cook and Annie,
followed by Michael, marched over the house and examined their
handiwork.</p>
<p>"Well, I hope we shall see something worth looking at," said Mrs. Frith.
"I never worked so hard in all my natural."</p>
<p>"Oh, yes. Must get the place nice. Not going to have strange people come
here and grumble," said Nurse.</p>
<p>"What is this Madame Flauve? Is she a lady?" Cook asked.</p>
<p>"Oh, yes. Yes. A lady. French. Very particular," Nurse replied.</p>
<p>Michael wondered what his governess would be like. He never remembered
to have seen Nanny so reverently excited before.</p>
<p>"I've heard a lot about these French women," said Mrs. Frith. "A lot
about them, I have. They live very gay, don't they?"</p>
<p>"Doesn't matter how they live. No. No. Must have everything at its
best," Nurse insisted.</p>
<p>By the time the scouring of the house was done, Michael was prepared for
the advent of a creature so lovely that he made up his mind the mere
sight of her would fill him with joy. He had not settled exactly which
princess she would most nearly resemble. As he turned over the pages of
his fairy-books, he would fancy with every illustration that here was to
be seen the image of his beautiful French governess. As he lay awake in
his bed on a quiet Sunday evening, so pleasant was the imagination of
her radiancy that fears and horrors were driven away by the power of her
beauty's spell. The night acquired something of the peace and sanctity
of Christmas Eve, when the air was hallowed by Santa Claus on his jovial
pilgrimage. He had never felt so little oppressed by the night, so
confident in the might of good.</p>
<p>On Monday morning Michael jigged through his dressing, jigged downstairs
to breakfast, jigged through the meal itself and jigged upstairs to the
dining-room to watch for the splendid arrival. He tambourinated upon the
window-pane a gay little tune, jigging the while from foot to foot in an
ecstasy of anticipation.</p>
<p>Nurse had decided that the morning-room was not a fit place for such a
paragon to perform her duties. Nor did she feel that the day-nursery was
worthy of her. So, even while Michael jigged at his vigil, Nurse was
arming the dining-room table for an encounter with greatness. Inkpots
were dusted and displayed; blotting-pads, including one poker—worked
with a view of Antwerp Cathedral, were unfolded. Pens and pencils and
pieces of india-rubber and pen-wipers and boxes of nibs and drawing-pins
were lavishly scattered about the green tablecloth. Various blue
exercise-books gleamed in the April sunlight and, to set the seal upon
the whole business, a calendar of Great Thoughts was roughly divested of
ninety-eight great thoughts at once, in order that for this rare female
a correct announcement should celebrate the ninth of April, her famous
date. At five minutes to ten Nurse and Michael were both in a state of
excitement; Cook was saying that she had never regretted the inadequacy
of the kitchen arrangements of Sixty-four until this moment; and Annie
was bracing herself for the real effort, the opening of the door to
Madame Flauve. The only calm person was Stella who, clasping a rubber
doll with tight curly rubber hair and a stomachic squeak, chanted to
herself the saga of Madame Flauve's arrival.</p>
<p>At two minutes past ten Michael said somebody was coming up the steps,
and a ring confirmed his assertion. The door was opened. Madame Flauve
was heard rubbing her boots on the <span class="smcap">SALVE</span> of the mat, was heard putting
away her umbrella in the peacock-blue china umbrella-stand, was heard
enquiring for Mrs. Fane and was announced inaudibly by Annie.</p>
<p>Michael's heart sank when he beheld a fat young French-woman with a
bilious complexion and little pig's eyes and a dowdy black mantle and a
common black hat. As for Nurse, she sniffed quite audibly and muttered
an insincere hope that Madame Flauve would find everything to her
liking. The governess answered in the thick voice of one who is always
swallowing jujubes that without a doubt she would find everything, and
presently Nurse left the room with many a backward glance of contempt
towards Madame Flauve.</p>
<p>When the lessons began (or rather before they began) a time-table was
drawn up by Madame Flauve:</p>
<table border="0" cellpadding="2" cellspacing="1" summary="time-table">
<tr valign="middle"><td>Monday</td>
<td class="tbb"> </td>
<td>10—11<br/>
11—12<br/>
12—1</td>
<td>French<br/>Geography<br/>History</td>
<td>2.30—4</td><td>Walk</td></tr>
<tr valign="middle"><td>Tuesday</td>
<td class="tbb"></td>
<td>10—11<br/>
11—12<br/>
12—1</td>
<td>Geography<br/>History<br/>
French</td><td>2.30—4</td><td>Walk</td></tr>
<tr valign="middle"><td>Wednesday</td>
<td class="tbb"></td>
<td>10—11<br/>
11—12<br/>
12—1</td>
<td>History<br/>Geography<br/>French</td>
<td>2.30—4</td><td>Walk</td></tr>
<tr valign="middle"><td>Thursday</td>
<td class="tbb"></td>
<td>10—11<br/>
11—12<br/>
12—1</td>
<td>French<br/>History<br/>Geography    </td>
<td>2.30—4</td><td>Walk</td></tr>
<tr valign="middle"><td>Friday</td>
<td class="tbb"></td>
<td>10—11<br/>
11—12<br/>
12—1</td>
<td>Geography<br/>French<br/>History</td>
<td>2.30—4</td><td>Walk</td></tr>
</table>
<p>Michael, when he saw the programme of his work, felt much depressed. It
seemed to lack variety and he was not very much cheered up to hear that
at meals only French would be spoken. Those meals were dreadful. At
first Nurse and Stella were present, but when Nanny found that Madame
wanted to teach Stella the French for knife and fork, she declined to
have dinner downstairs any longer, and Michael and Madame Flauve were
left to dine tête-à-tête on dull food and a languishing conversation.</p>
<p>"Madam indeed," Nurse would sniff, when the governess had left after
tea, "I never heard of such a thing in all my life. Madam! A fine
Madam!"</p>
<p>"What an imperence," agreed Mrs. Frith. "Fancy, a ordinary volgar thing
like that to go calling herself Madam, whatever shall we come to?"</p>
<p>"It does seem a cheek, don't it?" said Annie.</p>
<p>"I never!" Cook gasped. "I never! Madam! Well, I could almost laugh at
the sauce of it. And all that cleaning as you might say for a person as
isn't a scrap better than you and me."</p>
<p>"Oh, I've written to Mrs. Fane," said Nurse. "I said there must be some
mistake been made. Oh, yes, a mistake—must be a mistake."</p>
<p>Michael did not much enjoy the walks with his governess. He was always
taken to a second-hand furniture-shop in the Hammersmith Road, not a
pleasant old furniture-shop with Toby mugs and stuffed birds and coins;
but a barrack full of red washing-stands and white-handled chests of
drawers. Madame Flauve informed him that she was engaged in furnishing
at that moment, and would immediately show him a locket with the
portrait of her husband inset. Michael could not gain any clear idea of
what M. Flauve was like, since all that remained was a nebulous profile
smothered by a very black moustache. Madame Flauve told him that M.
Flauve was 'tout-à-fait charmant, mais charmant, mon petit. Il était si
aimable, si gentil et d'un cœur très très bon.' Michael grew very
tired of being jostled outside the furniture-shop every afternoon, while
his governess grubbed around the ugly furniture and argued with the man
about the prices. The only article she ever bought was a commode, which
so violently embarrassed Michael that he blushed the whole way home. But
Madame Flauve often made him blush and would comment upon subjects not
generally mentioned except by Mrs. Frith, and even by her only in a
spirit of hearty coarseness that did not make Michael feel ashamed like
this Frenchwoman's suggestion of the nasty. He was on one occasion very
much disgusted by her remarks on the inside of an egg that was slightly
set. Yet while he was disgusted, his curiosity was stimulated by the
information imparted, and he made further enquiries from Nurse that
evening. Nanny was horrified, and said plainly that she considered this
governess no better than a low beast and that she should write
accordingly to Mrs. Fane.</p>
<p>After a month or two Michael was sent back to school in the morning,
though the afternoon walks still continued for a time. When Michael
returned to the Misses Marrow, he was promoted to the class above the
Kindergarten and was set to learn the elements of Latin in a desultory
and unpractical way, that is to say he was made to learn—</p>
<table border="0" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="0" summary="latin">
<tr><td align="left">Nominative,</td><td align="left">mensa,</td><td align="left">a table</td></tr>
<tr><td align="left">Vocative,</td><td align="left">mensa,</td><td align="left">O table</td></tr>
<tr><td align="left">Accusative,</td><td align="left">mensam,</td><td align="left">a table</td></tr>
</table>
<p class="nind">and the rest of the unintelligible rigmarole. He had no clear notion
what Latin was, and so far as he could make out nobody else at the Miss
Marrows' school had any clearer notion. Indeed, the only distinct
addition to his knowledge of life was gained from Vernon Brown who with
great ingenuity had hollowed out a cork and by the insertion of several
pins in the front had made of it a miniature cage in which he kept a
fly. All the other boys were much impressed by Vernon Brown's
achievement, and very soon they all came to school with flies captive in
excavated corks. Michael longed to be like these bigger boys and pined
for a cage. One day Edward Arnott gave him one, and all the rest of that
day Michael watched the fly trying to escape. When he showed it to
Madame Flauve, she professed herself shocked by the cruelty of it and
begged him to release the fly, asserting that she would find him a
substitute which would deceive all the other boys. Michael agreed to
release his captive and the long-imprisoned fly walked painfully out of
his cell. Then Madame Flauve chipped off a little piece of coal and tied
it round with one of her own hairs and showed Michael how by cunningly
twisting this hair, the coal would gain the appearance of mobility.
Michael was doubtful at first, but Madame's exaggerated encouragement
led him to suppose that it was safe to practise the deception on his
companions. So on the next day he proceeded to exhibit his 'fly.' But
everybody knew it was coal and jeered at Michael and made him very
unhappy and anxious never again to attempt to differentiate himself or
his actions from the rest of mankind.</p>
<p>Michael's mother came home towards the end of July, and Madame Flauve
vanished to her husband and house and furniture. Michael did not regret
her. Mrs. Fane asked him many questions and particularly she wanted to
know if he was perfectly happy. Michael said 'yes,' and his mother
seemed satisfied. She was now very much taken up with Stella, who was a
lovely little girl with grey eyes and light brown glinting hair. Michael
did not exactly feel jealous of his sister, but he had an emotion of
disappointment that no longer could he be alone with his mother in a
fragrant intimacy from which the perpetually sleeping Stella was
excluded. Now Stella no longer slept all the time, but, on the contrary,
was very much awake and very eager to be entertained. Michael also felt
a twinge of regret that Stella should be able out of her own self to
entertain grown-up people. He wished that he could compose these
wonderful, endless songs of hers. He could not but admit that they were
wonderful, and exactly like real poetry. To be sure their subjects were
ordinary enough. There was no magic in them. Stella would simply sing of
getting up in the morning and of the morning bath and the towel and the
bread and milk for breakfast. She would sing, too, of the ride in the
perambulator and of the ladies who paid her compliments as she passed.
It was a little galling to Michael that he, so long his mother's only
companion, should have to share her love with such an insidious rival.
Curious men with long hair came to the house, apparently just to see
Stella; for they took no notice at all of Michael. These long-haired
visitors would sit round in the drawing-room, while Stella played at the
piano pieces that were not half so hummable as those which Michael had
already learned to play in violent allegretto. Stella would sit upright
in her starchiest frock and widest sash and play without any music a
long and boring noise that made Michael feel very fidgety. He would
endure it for a while and then he would have to go out of the room. The
first time he had done this he had expected somehow that people would
run after him to bring him back. But nobody moved. Everyone was intent
upon Stella and her noise. They were all grunting and clearing their
throats and making unintelligible exclamations. Michael was glad that
they had begun to build houses in the waste ground opposite. It was
better to watch men climbing up ladders and walking over planks and
messing with lumps of mortar than to sit there among those guttural men
in an atmosphere of Stella worship. He felt sometimes that he would like
to pinch Stella's legs—they looked so sleek and well-behaved, as she
sat there playing the piano. Michael was never invited to play on the
drawing-room piano. He was only allowed to play up in the day-nursery,
with merely the ambition of one day being able to reach the pedals to
stir him on.</p>
<p>"Ach, Mrs. Vane," he heard these long-haired men declare. "Your daughter
is wonderful. Ach! Ach! Ach! She is a genius. She will be the great
bianist of the new generation. Ach! Ach! Ach!"</p>
<p>Michael began to feel that his love for his mother or her love for him
did not matter. He began to feel that only what he himself thought and
wanted did matter; and when she went away again he was sorry, but not so
sorry as he used to be. One of these long-haired men now began to come
every day to give Stella lessons on the drawing-room piano. He would
give a very loud knock and hang up a wide-brimmed black hat in the hall
and clear his throat and button up his coat very tightly and march into
the drawing-room to wait for Stella to be brought down. Stella would
come down the stairs with her grey eyes shining and her hair all fuzzy
and her hands smelling of pink soap, while Nurse would blow very
importantly and tell Michael not to peep round corners. Stella's music
lessons were much grander than Michael's in the stuffy back-room of Miss
Marrow's. Besides, Michael's music lessons were now particularly
unpleasant, because Miss Hunt, his mistress, had grown two warts on her
first finger during the summer holidays, which made him feel sick during
their eternal duets.</p>
<p>The withdrawal of Madame Flauve from the superintendence of Michael's
afternoon walks was apparently a great blow to Nurse. She had acquired a
habit either of retiring to the night-nursery or of popping out of the
back-door on secret errands. Stella in the charge of Annie was perfectly
happy upstairs, and Nurse resented very strongly Michael's enquiries as
to where she was going. Michael had no ulterior reasons for his
questions. He was sincerely interested by these afternoon walks of
Nurse, and speculated often upon her destination. She would always
return very cheerful and would often bring him home small presents—a
dark blue bird on a pin at boat-race time (for Nurse was staunchly
Oxford), a penny packet of stamps most of which were duplicates inside,
penny illustrated books of Cock Robin or Tom Thumb; and once she brought
him home a Night Companion. This Night Companion was a club-headed
stick, very powerful and warranted to secure the owner from a murderous
attack. It was one of a row in the window of a neighbouring
umbrella-shop, a long row of Night Companions that cost one shilling
each. Michael liked his stick and took it to bed with him and was
comforted, when he woke up, by the sight of its knotted head upon the
bolster. He grew very intimate with the stick and endowed it with
character and temperament and humanity. He would often stare at the
still unpurchased Night Companions in the shop, trying to discover if
any other of them were so beneficent and so pleasant a companion as his
own. In time he took a fancy to another, and begged Nurse to be allowed
to buy this for Stella. Nurse was gratified by his appreciation of her
present and gave him leave to break into the ten-shilling piece to endow
Stella with a Companion. Michael himself carried it home, wrapped in a
flimsy brown paper and tied up as he thought unnecessarily with a flimsy
string. Stella was told to take it to bed with her and did so, but by
some accident grazed her forehead on the Night Companion's knotty head
and cried so much that it was taken away from her. This was all the
better for Michael who thenceforth had two Night Companions—one on
either side of him to guard him from the door and the window.</p>
<p>Still, notwithstanding these presents, Nurse grew more and more
irritable to find Michael watching her exits from and entrances into 64
Carlington Road. Once, she was so much annoyed to see Michael's face
pressed against the pane of the morning-room window that she slid all
the way down the area-steps and sent Michael to bed as a punishment for
peeping. At last she decided that Michael must go for walks by himself
and lest he should be lost or get into mischief, every walk must be in
the same direction, along the same road to the same place and back. He
was to walk up Carlington Road into the Hammersmith Road and along the
Kensington Road as far as the Earl's Court Road. Here he was to stop and
turn round and walk back to Carlington Road on his traces.</p>
<p>Michael detested this walk. He would stump up the area-steps, watched by
Nurse, and he would walk steadily, looking neither to the right nor to
the left according to orders, as far as 44 Carlington Road. Here in the
morning-room window was a small aquarium, sadly mobile with half a
dozen pale goldfish, that Michael would be compelled to watch for a few
seconds before he turned round and acknowledged the fact that Nurse was
flicking him on with her hand. Michael would proceed past the other
houses until he came to 22 Carlington Road, where a break occurred,
caused by a house entirely different from any of the others, at the side
of which was a huge double door. This was sometimes open, and inside
could be seen men hammering with chisels at enormous statues including
representations of Queen Victoria and of a benignant lion. Next to this
house was a post office, not an ordinary post office where stamps could
be bought, but a harum-scarum place, full of postmen running up and down
and emptying bags and hammering on letters and talking very loudly and
very quickly. By this office Carlington Road made an abrupt rectangular
turn past a tumble-down tarred fence, through whose interstices could be
seen a shadowy garden full of very long pale grass and of trees with
jet-black trunks. Beyond the trees was a tumble-down house with big bare
windows glinting amongst the ivy. After this Carlington Road went on
again with smaller houses of a deeper red brick than those in the part
where Michael lived. They had no basements, and one could see into their
dining-rooms, so close were they to the road. When 2 Carlington Road was
reached a tall advertisement hoarding began, and for a hundred yards the
walk became absolutely interesting. Then Carlington Mansions rose
majestic, and Michael, who had been told that they were flats and had
heard people wondering at this strange new method of existence, loitered
for a moment in order to watch a man in a uniform, sitting on a wooden
chair and reading a pink newspaper. He also read the names of people who
were either out or in, and settled, when he was older, to live in a flat
in the security of many other families and a man in a green uniform. The
roar of the Hammersmith Road burst upon him, and dreams were over for a
while, as he hurried along past eight shops, at none of which he would
dare to look since he read in a book of a boy who had been taken off to
the police station on a charge of theft, though he was actually as
innocent as Michael himself and was merely interested by the contents of
a shop window. The next turning to Carlington Road was a queer terrace,
very quiet except that it overlooked the railway, very quiet and
melancholy and somehow wicked. Nothing ever turned down here except an
occasional dog or cat; no servants stood gossiping by area-gates, and at
the end of it loomed the tumble-down house whose garden Michael had
already seen near the post office. He used to think as he left Padua
Terrace behind him that one day for a great adventure he would like to
walk along under its elm-trees to discover if anyone did live in those
dark houses; but he never managed to be brave enough to do so. Michael
now crossed the railway bridge and looked at the advertisements: then
followed a dull line of iron railings with rusty pineapples on top of
each of them. These were bounded at each end by gates that were marked
'Private. No Thoroughfare,' and after the second gate came the first
crossing. Michael had been told to be very careful of crossings, and he
used to poise himself on the kerb for a moment to see if any carts were
near. If none were even in sight, he used to run across as quickly as he
could. There were three other crossings before Earl's Court Road was
reached, and one of them was so wide that he was very glad indeed when
it was put behind him. All the way, terrace after terrace of grim
houses, set back from the high road behind shrubberies, had to be
passed, and all the way Michael used to hum to himself for company and
diversion and encouragement. The only interesting event was a
pavement-artist, and he was very often not there. It was an exasperating
and monotonous walk, and he hated it for the gloom it shed upon all his
afternoons.</p>
<p>Sometimes Michael would arrive home before Nanny, and then he would have
to endure a long cross-examination upon his route. The walk was not
sufficiently interesting to invent tales about, and he resented Nurse's
incredulous attitude and wrinkled obstinate face. Indeed, Michael began
to resent Nurse altogether, and so far as he was able he avoided her.
His scheme of things was logical: he had already a philosophy, and his
conception of the wonder inherent in everything was evidently not
unique, because the pictures in Don Quixote proved conclusively that
what Michael thought, other people besides himself thought. He might be
old-fashioned, as Nurse assured him he was; but if to be old-fashioned
was to live in the world of Don Quixote, he certainly preferred it to
the world in which Nanny lived. That seemed to him a circumscribed and
close existence for which he had no sympathy. It was a world of poking
about in medicine-cupboards, of blind unreasonableness, of stupidity and
malice and blank ugliness. He would sit watching Nanny nibbling with her
front teeth the capers of the caper sauce, and he would hate her. She
interfered with him, with his day-dreams and toys and meals; and the
only time when he wanted her presence was in the middle of the night,
when she was either drinking her glass of ale in the kitchen or snoring
heavily in the next room. Michael's only ambition was to live in his own
world. This he would have shared with his mother, but her visits were
now so rare that it was unwise to rely on her presence for happiness. He
was learning to do without her: Nurse he had never yet learnt to endure.
She charged ferociously into his fancies, shattering them with her fussy
interference, just as she would snatch away his clay pipe, when the most
perfect bubble was trembling on the edge of the bowl.</p>
<p>"Time for tea," she would mutter. "Time for bed," she would chatter.
Always it was time for something unpleasant.</p>
<p>Mrs. Frith, on the other hand, was a person whose attractions grew with
longer friendship, as Nurse's decreased even from the small quantity she
originally possessed. As Michael month by month grew older, Mrs. Frith
expanded towards him. She found him an attentive, even a breathless
listener to her rollicking tales. Her life Michael plainly perceived to
have been crammed with exciting adventures. In earliest youth she had
been forced by cunning to outwit a brutal father with the frightening
habit of coming home in the evening and taking off his belt to her and
her brothers and her sisters. The house in which she lived had been full
of hiding-places, and Mrs. Frith, picturing herself to Michael of less
ample girth, described wonderfully how her father had actually routed
for her with a broom-handle while her mother sat weeping into an apron.
Then it appeared that it was the custom of small boys in the street of
her youth to sell liquorice-water in exchange for pins.</p>
<p>"But was it nice?" asked Michael, remembering liquorice-powder.</p>
<p>"Lovely stuff," Mrs. Frith affirmed. "They used to go calling up and
down, 'Fine liquorice-water! Fine liquorice-water! Bring out your pins
and have a bottle of liquorice-water.'"</p>
<p>"And did you?" asked Michael.</p>
<p>"Did we? Of course we did—every pin in the place. There wasn't a pin in
the whole street after those boys had gone by."</p>
<p>"What else did you do when you were little, Mrs, Frith?"</p>
<p>"What else? Why everything."</p>
<p>"Yes, but tell me what," Michael begged, clasping his knees and looking
earnestly at Cook.</p>
<p>"Why once I went to a Sunday-school treat and got thrown off of a donkey
and showed more than I meant and the boys all hollered after me going to
Sunday-school and I used to stand behind a corner and dodge them. The
saucy demons!"</p>
<p>These tales were endless, and Michael thought how jolly it would be to
set out early one summer morning with Mrs. Frith and look for adventures
like Don Quixote. This became a favourite day-dream, and he used to
fancy Mrs. Frith tossed in a blanket like Sancho Panza. What company she
would be, and it would be possible with two donkeys. He had seen women
as fat as her riding on donkeys by the seaside.</p>
<p>One day Mrs. Frith told him she was thinking of getting married again,
and on a Sunday afternoon Michael was introduced to her future husband,
a certain Mr. Hopkins, who had a shining red head and an enormous
coloured handkerchief into which he trumpeted continuously. Mr. Hopkins
also had a daughter three or four years older than Michael—a wizened
little girl called Flossie who spoke in a sort of hiss and wore very
conspicuous underclothing of red flannelette. Michael and Flossie played
together shyly under the admiring patronage of Mrs. Frith and Mr.
Hopkins, and were just beginning to be friendly when Nurse came in and
said:</p>
<p>"Can't be allowed. No, no. Never heard of such a thing. Tut-tut."</p>
<p>After this Nurse and Mrs. Frith did not seem to get on very well, and
Mrs. Frith used to talk about 'people as gave theirselves airs which
they had no business to of done.' She was kinder than ever to Michael
and gave him as many sultanas as he wanted and told him all about the
house into which she and Mr. Hopkins and Flossie would presently depart
from Carlington Road.</p>
<p>"Are you going away?" Michael asked, aghast.</p>
<p>"Going to be married," said Mrs. Frith.</p>
<p>"But I don't want you to go."</p>
<p>"There, bless your heart, I've a good mind to stay. I believe you'll
miss your poor old Mrs. Frith, eh, ducky?"</p>
<p>Everybody nice went away, Michael thought. It was extraordinary how only
nasty food and nasty people were wholesome.</p>
<p>Mrs. Frith's departure was even more exciting than her stories. One
afternoon Michael found her in the kitchen, dancing about with her
skirts kilted above her knees. He was a little embarrassed at first, but
very soon he had to laugh because she was evidently not behaving like
this in order to show off, but because she enjoyed dancing about the
kitchen.</p>
<p>"Why are you dancing, Mrs. Frith?" he asked.</p>
<p>"Happy as a lark, lovey," she answered in an odd voice. "Happy as a
lark, for we won't go home till morning, we won't go home till morning,"
and singing, she twirled round and round until she sank into a wicker
arm-chair. At this moment Annie came running downstairs with Nurse, and
both of them glared at Mrs. Frith with shocked expressions.</p>
<p>"What ever are you doing, Cook?" said Nurse.</p>
<p>"That's all right, lovey. That's All Sir Garnet, and don't you make no
mistake. Don't you—make no mistake."</p>
<p>Here Mrs. Frith gave a very loud hiccup and waved her arms and did not
even say 'beg pardon' for the offensive noise.</p>
<p>"Michael," said Nurse, "go upstairs at once. Mrs. Frith, get up. You
ignorant and vulgar woman. Get up."</p>
<p>"And you ought to be ashamed of yourself," said Cook to Nurse. "You old
performing monkey, that's what you are."</p>
<p>"Annie," said Nurse, "fetch a policeman in, and go and get this woman's
box."</p>
<p>"Woman!" said Mrs. Frith. "Woman yourself. Who's a woman? I'm not a
woman. No, I'm not. And if I am a woman, you're not the one to say so.
Ah, I know how many bottles have gone out of this house and come
in—not by me."</p>
<p>"Hold your impudent tongue," said Nurse.</p>
<p>"I shall not hold my tongue, so now," retorted Mrs. Frith.</p>
<p>Michael had squeezed himself behind the kitchen door fascinated by this
duel. It was like Alice in Wonderland, and every minute he expected to
see Cook throwing plates at Nanny, who was certainly making faces
exactly like the Duchess. The area door slammed, and Michael wondered
what was going to happen. Presently there came the sound of a deep tread
in the passage and a policeman entered.</p>
<p>"What's all this?" he said in a deep voice.</p>
<p>"Constable," said Nurse, "will you please remove this dreadful woman?"</p>
<p>"What's she been doing?" asked the policeman.</p>
<p>"She's drunk."</p>
<p>Mrs. Frith apparently overwhelmed by the enormity of the accusation
tottered to her feet and seized a saucepan.</p>
<p>"None of that now," said the policeman roughly, as he caught her by the
waist.</p>
<p>"Oh, I'm not afraid of a bluebottle," said Mrs. Frith haughtily. "Not of
a bluebottle, I'm not."</p>
<p>"Are you going to charge her?" the policeman asked.</p>
<p>"No, no. Nothing but turn her out. The girl's packing her box. Give her
the box and let her go."</p>
<p>"Not without my wages," said Mrs. Frith. "I'm not going to leave my
wages behind. Certaintly I'm not."</p>
<p>Nurse fumbled in her purse, and at last produced some money.</p>
<p>"That's the easiest way," said the policeman. "Pay her the month and let
her go. Come on, my lady."</p>
<p>He seized Mrs. Frith and began to walk her to the door as if she were a
heavy sack. Michael began to cry. He did not want Mrs. Frith to be hurt
and he felt frightened. In the passage she suddenly broke loose and,
turning round, pushed Nurse into the laundry-basket and was so pleased
with her successful effort that she almost ran out of the house and
could presently be heard singing very cheerfully 'White wings, they
never grow weary,' to the policeman. In the end her trunk was pushed
down the front-door steps, and after more singing and arguing a
four-wheeler arrived and Mrs. Frith vanished for ever from Carlington
Road.</p>
<p>The effect of this scene on Nurse was to make her more repressive and
secretive. She was also very severe on vulgarity; and all sorts of old
words were wrapped up in new words, as when bread and dripping became
bread and honey, because dripping was vulgar. The house grew much
gloomier with Mrs. Frith's departure. The new cook whose name Michael
never found out, because she remained the impersonal official, was very
brusque and used to say: "Now then, young man, out of my kitchen or I'll
tell Nurse. And don't hang about in the passage or in two-twos you'll be
sorry you ever came downstairs."</p>
<p>It was autumn again, and the weather was dreary and wet. Michael
suffered a severe shock one morning. It was too foggy to go to school
and he was sitting alone in the window of the morning-room, staring at
the impenetrable and fearful yellowness of the air. Suddenly he heard
the cry, 'Remember, remember the Fifth of November, and gunpowder,
treason and plot,' and, almost before he had time to realize it was the
dreaded Guy Fawkes, a band of loud-voiced boys with blackened faces came
surging down the area steps and held close to the window a nodding Guy.
Michael shrieked with fear and ran from the room, only to be told by
Nurse that she'd never heard such old-fashioned nonsense in all her
life.</p>
<p>During that November the fogs were very bad and, as an epidemic term had
compelled the Misses Marrow to close their school, Michael brooded at
home in the gaslit rooms that shone dully in the street of footsteps.
The long morning would drag its length out, and dinner would find no
appetite in Michael. Stella seemed not to care to play and would mope
with round eyes saddened by this eternal gloom. Dusk was merely marked
by the drawing down of the blinds at the clock's hour without regard to
the transit from day to night. Michael used to wonder if it were
possible that this fog would last for ever, if for ever he would live in
Carlington Road in this yellow twilight, if his mother had forgotten
there ever was such a person as Michael Fane. But, at any rate, he would
have to grow up. He could not always be the same size. That was a
consolation. It was jolly to dream of being grown-up, to plan one's
behaviour and think of freedom. The emancipation of being grown-up
seemed to Michael to be a magnificent prospect. To begin with it was no
longer possible to be naughty. He realized, indeed, that crimes were a
temptation to some grown-ups, that people of a certain class committed
murders and burglaries, but as he felt no inclination to do either, he
looked forward to a life of unbroken virtue.</p>
<p>So far as he could ascertain, grown-up people were exempt from even the
necessity to distinguish between good and evil. If Michael examined the
Commandments one by one, this became obvious. <i>Thou shalt have none
other gods than me</i>. Why should one want to have? One was enough. The
Children of Israel must be different from Michael. He could not
understand such peculiar people. <i>Make not to thyself any graven image</i>.
The only difficulty about this commandment was its length for learning.
Otherwise it did not seem to bear on present-day life. <i>Thou shalt not
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain</i>. This was another vague
injunction. Who wanted to? <i>Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath Day</i>. It
was obviously a simple matter for grown-up people, who no longer enjoyed
playing with toys, to keep this commandment. At present it was
difficult to learn and difficult to keep. <i>Honour thy father and thy
mother</i>. He loved his mother. He would always love her, even if she
forgot him. He might not love her so much as formerly, but he would
always love her. <i>Thou shalt do no murder</i>. Michael had no intention of
doing murder. Since the Hangman in Punch and Judy he was cured of any
inclination towards murder. <i>Thou shalt not commit adultery</i>. Why should
he ever want to marry another man's wife? At present he could not
imagine himself married to anybody. He supposed that as one result of
growing up he would get married. But, forewarned, he would take care not
to choose somebody else's wife. <i>Thou shalt not steal</i>. With perfect
freedom to eat when and where and what one liked, why should one steal?
<i>Thou shalt not bear false witness</i>. It would not be necessary to lie
when grown up, because one could not then be punished. <i>Thou shalt not
covet thy neighbour's ox</i>. He would covet nothing, for when he was grown
up he would be able to obtain whatever he wanted.</p>
<p>This desire to be grown up sustained him through much, even through the
long foggy nights which made his bedroom more fearfully still than
before. The room would hardly seem any longer to exist in the murk which
crept through it. The crocus-shaped jet of the gas burned in the
vaporous midnight with an unholy flame somehow, thought Michael, as
candles must look, when at the approach of ghosts they burn blue. How
favourable to crime was fog, how cleverly the thief might steal over the
coal-yard at the back of the house and with powerful tools compel the
back-door to open. And the murderers, how they must rejoice in the
impenetrable air as with long knives they stole out from distant streets
in search of victims. Michael's nerves were so wrought upon by the
unchanging gloom of these wintry days that even to be sent by Nurse to
fetch her thimble or work-bag before tea was a racking experience.</p>
<p>"Now then, Michael, run downstairs like a good boy and fetch my needle
and cotton which I left in the morning-room," Nurse would command. And
in the gathering dusk Michael would practically slide downstairs until
he reached the basement. Then, clutching the object of his errand, he
would brace himself for the slower ascent. Suppose that when he reached
the hall there were two skeletons sitting on the hall chest? Suppose
that on the landing above a number of rats rushed out from the
housemaid's closet to bite his legs and climb over him and gnaw his
face? Suppose that from the landing outside his own room a masked
burglar were stealing into his room to hide himself under the bed?
Suppose that when he arrived back at the day-nursery, Stella and Nurse
were lying with their heads chopped off, as he had once seen a family
represented by a pink newspaper in the window of a little shop near
Hammersmith Broadway? Michael used to reach his goal, white and shaking,
and slam the door against the unseen follower who had dogged his
footsteps from the coal-cellar. The cries of a London twilight used to
oppress him. From the darkening streets and from the twinkling houses
inexplicable sounds floated about the air. They had the sadness of
church-bells, and like church-bells they could not be located exactly.
Michael thought that London was the most melancholy city in the world.
Even at Christmas-time, behind all the gaiety and gold of a main road
lay the trackless streets that were lit, it seemed, merely by pin-points
of gas, so far apart were the lamp-posts, such a small sad circle of
pavement did they illuminate. The rest was shadows and glooms and
whispers. Even in the jollity of the pantomime and comfortable smell of
well-dressed people the thought of the journey home through the rainy
evening brooded upon the gayest scene. The going home was sad indeed, as
in the farthest corner of the jolting omnibus they jogged through the
darkness. The painted board of places and fares used to depress
Michael. He could not bear to think of the possibilities opened up by
the unknown names beyond Piccadilly Circus. Once in a list of fares he
read the word Whitechapel and shivered at the thought that an omnibus
could from Whitechapel pass the corner of Carlington Road. This very
omnibus had actually come from the place where murders were done.
Murderers might at this moment be travelling in his company. Michael
looked askance at the six nodding travellers who sat opposite, at the
fumes of their breath, at their hands clasped round the handles of their
umbrellas. There, for all he knew, sat Jack the Ripper. It happened that
night that one of the travellers, an old gentleman with gold-rimmed
eye-glasses, alighted at the corner and actually turned down Carlington
Road. Michael was horrified and tugged at Nanny's arm to make her go
faster.</p>
<p>"Whyever on earth are you dancing along like a bear for? Do you want to
go somewhere, you fidgety boy?" said Nurse, pulling Michael to her side
with a jerk.</p>
<p>"Oh, Nanny, there's a man following us, who got out of our bus."</p>
<p>"Well, why shouldn't he get out? Tut-tut. Other people besides you want
to get out of buses. I shan't ever take you to the pantomime again, if
you aren't careful."</p>
<p>"Well, I will be careful," said Michael, who, perceiving the lamp in
their front hall, recovered from his fright and became anxious to
propitiate Nanny.</p>
<p>"So I should think," muttered Nurse. "Tut-tut-tut-tut-tut." Michael
thought she would never stop clicking her tongue.</p>
<p>About this time with the fogs and the rain and the loneliness and
constant fear that surrounded him, Michael began to feel ill. He worried
over his thin arms, comparing them with the sleek Stella's. His golden
hair lost its lustre and became drab and dark and skimpy. His cheeks
lost their rose-red, and black lines ringed his large and sombre blue
eyes. He cared for little else but reading, and even reading tired him
very much, so that once he actually fell asleep over the big Don
Quixote. About two hundred pages were bent underneath the weight of his
body, and the book was taken away from him as a punishment for his
carelessness. It was placed out of his reach on top of the bookcase and
Michael used to stand below and wish for it. No entreaties were well
enough expressed to move Nurse; and Don Quixote remained high out of
reach in the dust and shadows of the ceiling. Nurse grew more and more
irrational in her behaviour and complained more and more of the
neuralgia to which she declared she was a positive martyr. Annie went
away into the country because she was ill and a withered housemaid took
her place, while the tall thin house in Carlington Road became more grim
every day.</p>
<p>Then a lucky event gave Michael a new interest. Miss Caroline Marrow
began to teach him the elements of Botany, and recommended all the boys
to procure window-boxes for themselves. Michael told Nurse about this;
and, though she muttered and clicked and blew a great deal, one day a
bandy-legged man actually came and fitted Michael's window-sills with
two green window-boxes. He spent the whole of his spare time in prodding
the sweet new mould, in levelling it and patting it, and filling in
unhappy little crevices which had been overlooked. Then on a fine spring
morning he paid a visit to the old woman who sold penny packets of
seeds, and bought nasturtiums, mignonette, Virginia stocks and
candytuft, twelve pansy roots and twelve daisy roots. Michael's flowers
grew and flourished and he loved his window-boxes. He liked to turn
towards his window at night now. Somehow those flowers were a
protection. He liked to lie in bed during the sparrow-thronged mornings
of spring and fancy how the birds must enjoy hopping about in his
window-boxes. He was always careful to scatter plenty of crumbs, so that
they should not be tempted to peck up his seeds or pull to pieces the
pansy buds. He was disappointed that neither the daisies nor the pansies
smelt sweet, and when the mignonette bloomed, he almost sniffed it away,
so lovely was the perfume of it during the blue days of June. He had a
set of gardening tools, so small and suitable to the size of his garden
that rake and hoe and spade and fork were all originally fastened to one
small square of cardboard.</p>
<p>But, best of all, when the pansies were still a-blowing and the Virginia
stocks were fragrant, and when from his mother's window below he could
see his nasturtium flowers, golden and red and even tortoiseshell
against the light, his mother came home suddenly for a surprize, and the
house woke up.</p>
<p>"But you're not looking well, darling," she said.</p>
<p>"Oh, yes, quite well. Quite well," muttered Nurse, "Quite well. Mustn't
be a molly-coddle. No. No."</p>
<p>"I really must see about a nice governess for you," said Mrs. Fane.
Nurse sniffed ominously.</p>
<h3><a id="Chapter_V_The_First_Fairy_Princess" name="Chapter_V_The_First_Fairy_Princess"></a>Chapter V: <i>The First Fairy Princess</i></h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">M</span>ISS CARTHEW'S arrival widened very considerably Michael's view of life.
Nurse's crabbed face and stunted figure had hitherto appropriately
enough dominated such realities of existence as escaped from the glooms
and shadows of his solitary childhood. Michael had for so long been
familiar with ugliness that he was dangerously near to an eternal
imprisonment in a maze of black fancies. He had come to take pleasure in
the grotesque and the macabre, and even on the sunniest morning his
imagination would turn to twilight and foggy eves, to basements and
empty houses and loneliness and dust. Michael would read furtively the
forbidden newspapers that Nurse occasionally left lying about. In these
he would search for murders and crimes, and from their association with
thrills of horror, the newspapers themselves had gradually acquired a
definitely sinister personality. If at dusk Michael found a newspaper by
Nurse's arm-chair, he would approach it with beating heart, and before
he went over to read it where close to the window the light of day
lingered, he would brood upon his own daring, as if some Bluebeard's
revenge might follow.</p>
<p>When Michael's mother was at home, he was able to resume the
cheerfulness of the last occasion on which her company had temporarily
relieved his solitude; but always behind the firelit confidences, the
scented good mornings and good nights, the gay shopping walks and all
the joys which belonged to him and her, stood threatening and inevitable
the normal existence with Nurse in which these rosy hours must be
remembered as only hours, fugitive and insecure and rare. Now came Miss
Carthew's brisk and lively presence to make many alterations in the life
of 64 Carlington Road, Kensington.</p>
<p>Michael's introduction to his governess took place in the presence of
his mother and, as he stood watching the two women in conversation, he
was aware of a tight-throated feeling of pleasure. They were both so
tall and slim and beautiful: they were both so straight and clean that
they gave him the glad sensation of blinds pulled up to admit the sun.</p>
<p>"I think we're going to be rather good friends," said Miss Carthew.</p>
<p>Michael could only stare his agreement, but he managed to run before
Miss Carthew in order to open the door politely, when she was going out.
In bed that night he whispered to his mother how much he liked Miss
Carthew and how glad he was that he could leave the Miss Marrows' for
the company of Miss Carthew all day long.</p>
<p>"And all night?" he asked wistfully.</p>
<p>"No, not at present, darling," she answered. "Nanny will still look
after you at night."</p>
<p>"Will she?" Michael questioned somewhat doubtfully.</p>
<p>After Mrs. Fane went away, there was a short interval before the
new-comer assumed her duties. During this time Michael hummed
incessantly and asked Nurse a thousand questions about Miss Carthew.</p>
<p>"Goodness gracious, what a fuss about a governess," commented Nanny.
"Tut-tut. It might be the Queen of England. She'll be here quite soon
enough for everyone, I dare say."</p>
<p>It fell out that Miss Carthew was to arrive on Valentine Day, and
Michael with a delicious breathlessness thought how wonderful it would
be to present her with a Valentine. He did not dare tell Nurse of his
intention; but he hoped that by sending Valentines to every inmate of
the house he might be allowed to include Miss Carthew. Nurse was
agreeable to the notion of receiving a token, and in her company Michael
set out to a neighbouring stationer's shop to make his purchases. A
Valentine for Cook was bought, and one of precisely the same design for
Gladys the withered housemaid, and a rather better one for Stella, and a
better one still for Nurse.</p>
<p>"Come along now," said Nanny.</p>
<p>"Oh, but can't I get one for Miss Carthew? Do let me."</p>
<p>"Tut-tut-tut. What nonsense. I do declare. Whatever do you want to give
her a Valentine for?" Nurse demanded, as she tried to hustle Michael
from the shop.</p>
<p>"Oh, do let me, Nanny."</p>
<p>"Well, come along, and don't be all day choosing. Here, this will do,"
said Nurse, as she picked one from the penny tray.</p>
<p>But Michael had other ideas. He had noticed an exquisite Valentine of
apple-green satin painted with the rosiest of Cupids, the most crimson
of pierced hearts, a Valentine that was almost a sachet so thick was it,
so daintily fringed with fretted silver-paper.</p>
<p>"That one," he declared, pointing.</p>
<p>"Now what have I told you about pointing?"</p>
<p>"That large one's a shilling," said the stationer.</p>
<p>"Come along, come along," grumbled Nurse. "Wasting good money."</p>
<p>"But I want to have that one," said Michael.</p>
<p>For the first time in his life he did not feel at all afraid of Nurse,
so absolutely determined was he to present Miss Carthew with the
Valentine of his own free choice.</p>
<p>"I will have that one," he added. "It's my money."</p>
<p>"You will, will you, you naughty boy? You won't, then. So now! You dare
defy me. I never heard of such a thing. No, nothing more this morning,
thank you," Nurse added, turning to the stationer. "The little boy has
got all he wants. Say 'thank you' to the gentleman and 'good morning,'"
Nurse commanded Michael.</p>
<p>"I won't," he declared. "I won't." Scowling so that his nose nearly
vanished into his forehead, and beating back the tears that were surging
to his eyes, Michael followed Nurse from the shop. As he walked home, he
dug his nails wrathfully into the envelope of Valentines, and then
suddenly he saw a drain in the gutter. He hastily stooped and pushed the
packet between the bars of the grating, and let it fall beyond the
chance of recovery. When they reached their house, Nurse told him to
give her the cards, so that they might not be soiled before
presentation.</p>
<p>"I've dropped them," said Michael sullenly.</p>
<p>"Dropped them? Dropped them? What do you mean—dropped them?"</p>
<p>"I threw them away," said Michael.</p>
<p>"On purpose?"</p>
<p>"Yes. I can do what I like with my own things."</p>
<p>"You ungrateful wicked boy," said Nurse, horrified by such a claim.</p>
<p>"I don't care if I am," Michael answered. "I wanted to give Miss Carthew
a Valentine. Mother would have let me."</p>
<p>"Your mother isn't here. And when she isn't here, I'm your mother," said
Nurse, looking more old and wrinkled and monkey-like than ever.</p>
<p>"How dare you say you're my mother?" gasped the outraged son. "You're
not. You're not. Why, you're not a lady, so you couldn't ever be my
mother."</p>
<p>Hereupon Nurse disconcerted Michael by bursting into tears, and he
presently found himself almost petting her and declaring that he was
very sorry for having been so unkind. He found a certain luxury in this
penitence just as he used to enjoy a reconciliation with the black
kittens. Perhaps it was this scene with Nurse that prompted him soon
afterwards to the creation of another with his sister. The second scene
was brought about by Stella's objection to the humming with which
Michael was somewhat insistently celebrating the advent of Miss Carthew.</p>
<p>"Don't hum, Michael. Don't hum. Please don't hum," Stella begged very
solemnly. "Please don't hum, because it makes my head hurt."</p>
<p>"I <i>will</i> hum, and every time you ask me not to hum, I'll hum more
louder," said Michael.</p>
<p>Stella at once went to the piano in the day-nursery and began to play
her most unmelodious tune. Michael ran to the cupboard and produced a
drum which he banged defiantly. He banged it so violently that presently
the drum, already worn very thin, burst. Michael was furious and
immediately proceeded to twang an over-varnished zither. So furiously
did he twang the zither that finally he caught one of his nails in a
sharp string of the treble, and in great pain hurled the instrument
across the room. Meanwhile, Stella continued to play, and when Michael
commanded her to stop, answered annoyingly that she had been told to
practise.</p>
<p>"Don't say pwactise, you silly. Say practise," Michael contemptuously
exclaimed.</p>
<p>"Shan't," Stella answered with that cold and fat stolidity of demeanour
and voice which disgusted Michael like the fat of cold mutton.</p>
<p>"I'm older than you," Michael asserted.</p>
<p>Stella made no observation, but continued to play, and Michael, now
acutely irritated, rushed to the piano and slammed down the lid. Stella
must have withdrawn her fingers in time, for there was no sign of any
pinch or bruise upon them. However, she began to cry, while Michael
addressed to her the oration which for a long time he had wished to
utter.</p>
<p>"You are silly. You are a cry-baby. Fancy crying about nothing. I
wouldn't. Everybody doesn't want to hear your stupid piano-playing. Boys
at school think pianos are stupid. You always grumble about my humming.
You are a cry-baby.</p>
<p class="nind">What are little boys made of?<br/>
Sugar and spice and all that's nice,<br/>
That's what little boys are made of.<br/>
What are little girls made of?<br/>
Slugs and snails and puppy-dogs' tails,<br/>
Ugh! that's what little girls are made of."</p>
<p>"They're not," Stella screamed. "They're not!" Michael's perversion of
the original rhyme made her inarticulate with grief and rage. "They're
not, you naughty boy!"</p>
<p>Michael, contented with his victory, left Stella to herself and her
tears. As he hummed his way downstairs, he thought sensuously of the
imminent reconciliation, and in about ten minutes, having found some
barley-sugar buried against an empty day, Michael came back to Stella
with peace-offerings and words of comfort.</p>
<p>Miss Carthew arrived on the next morning and the nervous excitement of
waiting was lulled. Miss Carthew came through the rain of Valentine Day,
and Michael hugged himself with the thought of her taking off her
mackintosh and handing it to Gladys to be dried. With the removal of her
wet outdoor clothes, Miss Carthew seemed to come nearer to Michael and,
as they faced each other over the schoolroom table (for the day-nursery
in one moment had become the schoolroom), Michael felt that he could
bear not being grown up just for the pleasure of sitting opposite to his
new governess.</p>
<p>It was not so much by these lessons that Michael's outlook was widened
as by the conversations he enjoyed with Miss Carthew during their
afternoon walks. She told him, so far as she could, everything that he
desired to know. She never accused him of being old-fashioned or
inquisitive, and indeed as good as made him feel that the more questions
he asked the better she would like it. Miss Carthew had all the mental
and imaginative charm of the late Mrs. Frith in combination with an
outward attractiveness that made her more dearly beloved. Indeed Miss
Carthew had numberless pleasant qualities. If she promised anything, the
promise was always kept to the letter. If Michael did not know his
lesson or omitted the performance of an ordained task, Miss Carthew was
willing to hear the explanation of his failure and was never
unreasonable in her judgment. One morning very soon after her arrival,
Michael was unable to repeat satisfactorily the verse of the psalm
Venite Adoremus set for him to learn.</p>
<p>"Why don't you know it, Michael?" Miss Carthew asked.</p>
<p>"I had to go to bed."</p>
<p>"But surely you had plenty of time before you went to bed?" Miss Carthew
persisted.</p>
<p>"Nanny wanted to go out, and I went to bed early," Michael explained.</p>
<p>For a moment or two Miss Carthew considered the problem silently. Then
she rang the bell and told withered Gladys that she wished to speak to
Nurse. Presently Nurse came in, very aggressive and puckered.</p>
<p>"Did Michael have to go to bed very early last night?" Miss Carthew
enquired.</p>
<p>"Oh, yes. Yes," Nurse blew out. "Early last night. Wednesday night. Yes.
I had to go out. Yes."</p>
<p>"What time did he go to bed?" Miss Carthew went on.</p>
<p>"What time?" repeated Nurse. "Why the proper time, of course."</p>
<p>"Don't be insolent," said Miss Carthew very tranquilly.</p>
<p>Nurse blustered and wrinkled her nose and frowned and came very close to
Miss Carthew and peered up into her face, blowing harder than ever.</p>
<p>"The arrangements can't be altered for governesses," said Nurse. "No.
Tut-tut. Never heard of such a thing."</p>
<p>"The arrangements <i>will</i> be altered. In future Michael will go to bed at
half-past seven. It's not good for him to go to bed earlier. Do you
understand?"</p>
<p>"Do I understand? No, I don't understand," Nurse snapped.</p>
<p>"Very well," said Miss Carthew. "You need not wait, Nurse."</p>
<p>Nurse blinked and peered and fumed, but Miss Carthew paid so little
attention that Michael felt himself blushing for her humiliation.
However, he did not go to bed that night till half-past seven and at the
end of the week could rattle off the Venite in two breaths. It was
extraordinary how Nurse shrank into nothing at Miss Carthew's approach,
like a witch in the presence of a good fairy.</p>
<p>The nights were still a trial to Michael, but gradually they became less
terrible, as Miss Carthew's conversation gave him something better to
meditate upon than the possibilities of disaster and crime. On the
afternoon walks would be told stories of Miss Carthew's youth in the
West Country, of cliffs and sea-birds and wrecks, of yachting cruises
and swimming, of golden sands and magical coves and green islands. Miss
Carthew's own father had been a captain in the Royal Navy and she had
had one brother, a midshipman, who was drowned in trying to save the
life of his friend. By all accounts the Carthews must have lived in as
wonderful a house as was ever known. From the windows it was possible to
look down into the very sea itself, and from the front door, all
wreathed in roses, ran a winding path edged with white stones down to
the foot of the cliff. Day and night great ships used to sail from the
harbour, some outward bound with the crew singing in the cool airs of a
summer morning, some homeward bound, battered by storms. Miss Carthew,
when a little girl, had been the intimate friend of many coastguards,
had been allowed to peep through their long telescopes, had actually
seen a cannon fired at close quarters. Before her own eyes the lifeboat
had plunged forth to rescue ships and with her own hands she had caught
fish on quiet sunny mornings and on windless nights under the moon. Her
most valuable possession, however, must have been that father who could
sit for hours and never tell the same tale twice, but hold all who heard
him entranced with a narrative of hostile Indians, of Chinese junks, of
cannibals and wrecks and mutinies and bombardments. It was sad to hear
that Captain Carthew was now dead: Michael would have been glad to make
his acquaintance. It was sad to hear that the Carthews no longer lived
in the West within the sound of waves and winds; but it was consoling to
learn that they still lived in the depth of the country and that some
time, perhaps during this very next summer, Michael should certainly pay
Mrs. Carthew a visit. He would meet other Miss Carthews, one of whom was
only fourteen and could obviously without ceremony be hailed immediately
as Nancy. Of Joan and May, who were older, Michael spoke in terms of the
familiar Christian name with embarrassment, and he was much perplexed in
his own mind how he should address them, when actually they met.</p>
<p>"I wish you were going to take us away for our holidays to the seaside,"
Michael said.</p>
<p>"Perhaps I will another time," Miss Carthew replied. "But this year you
and Stella are going with Nurse, because Stella isn't going to begin
lessons with me till you go to school."</p>
<p>"Am I really going to school?"</p>
<p>"Yes, to St. James' Preparatory School," Miss Carthew assured him.</p>
<p>In consideration of Michael's swiftly approaching adventure, he was
allowed to take in the Boy's Own Paper monthly, and as an even greater
concession to age he was allowed to make friends with several boys in
Carlington Road, some of whom were already scholars of St. James'
Preparatory School and one of whom actually had a brother at St. James'
School itself, that gigantic red building whose gates Michael himself
would enter of right one day, however difficult at present this was to
believe.</p>
<p>What with the prospect of going to school in the autumn and Miss
Carthew's tales of freedom and naval life, Michael began to disapprove
more than ever of Nurse's manners and appearance. He did not at all
relish the notion of passing away the summer holidays in her society. To
be sure, for the end of the time he had been invited by Mrs. Carthew's
own thin writing to spend a week with her in Hampshire; but that was at
least a month away, and meanwhile there was this month to be endured
with Nurse at Mr. and Mrs. Wagland's lodgings, where the harmonium was
played and conversation was carried on by whispers and the mysterious
nods of three heads. However, the beginning of August arrived, and Miss
Carthew said good-bye for a month. Wooden spades, still gritty with last
year's sand, were produced from the farthest corners of cupboards:
mouldy shrimping nets and dirtied buckets and canvas shoes lay about on
the bed, and at last, huddled in paraphernalia, Nurse and Stella and
Michael jogged along to the railway station, a miserable hour for
Michael, who all the time was dreading many unfortunate events, as for
the cabman to get down from his box and quarrel about the fare, or for
the train to be full, or for Stella to be sick during the journey, or
for him and her to lose Nurse, or for all of them to get into the wrong
train, or for a railway accident to happen, or for any of the
uncomfortable contingencies to which seaside travellers were liable.</p>
<p>During these holidays Michael grew more and more deeply ashamed of
Nurse, and more and more acutely sensitive to her manners and
appearance. He was afraid that people on the front would mistake him and
Stella for her children. He grew hot with shame when he fancied that
people looked at him. He used to loiter behind on their walks and
pretend that he did not belong to Nurse, and hope sincerely that nobody
would think of connecting him with such an ugly old woman. He had heard
much talk of 'ladies and gentlemen' at the Kindergarten, and since then
Miss Carthew had indirectly confirmed his supposition that it was a
terrible thing not to be a gentleman and the son of a gentleman. He grew
very critical of his own dress and wished that he were not compelled to
wear a sailor-top that was slightly shabby. Once Mr. and Mrs. Wagland
accompanied them to church on a Sunday morning, and Michael was
horrified. People would inevitably think that he was the son of Mr.
Wagland. What a terrible thing that would be. He loitered farther behind
than ever, and would liked to have killed Mr. Wagland when he offered
him the half of his hymn-book. This incident seemed to compromise him
finally, to drag him down from the society of Miss Carthew to a degraded
status of unutterable commonness. Mr. Wagland would persist in digging
him with his elbow and urging him to sing up. Worse even, he once said
quite audibly 'Spit it out, sonny.' Michael reeled with shame.</p>
<p>September arrived at last, and then Michael realized suddenly that he
would have to make the journey to Hampshire alone. This seemed to him
the most astonishing adventure of his life. He surveyed his existence
from the earliest dawn of consciousness to the last blush caused by
Nurse's abominable habits, and could see no parallel of daring. He was
about to enter upon a direct relationship with the world of men. He
would have to enquire of porters and guards; he would have to be polite
without being prodded to ladies sitting opposite. No doubt they would
ask questions of him and he would have to answer distinctly. And beyond
this immediate encounter with reality was School. He had not grasped how
near he was to the first morning. A feeling of hopelessness, of
inability to grapple with the facts of life seized him. Growing old was
a very desperate business after all. How remote he was getting from
Nurse, how far away from the dingy solitude which had so long oppressed
his spirit. Already she seemed unimportant and already he could almost
laugh at the absurdity of being mistaken for a relation of hers. The
world was opening her arms and calling to him.</p>
<p>On the day before he was to set out for Hampshire, he and Nurse and
Stella and Mr. Wagland and Mrs. Wagland drove in a wagonette to picnic
somewhere in the country behind the sea. It had been a dry August and
the rolling chalk downs over which they walked were uniformly brown. The
knapweed was stunted and the scabious blooms drooped towards the dusty
pasture. Only the flamy ladies' slippers seemed appropriate to the miles
of heat that flickered against the landscape. Michael ran off alone,
sliding as he went where the drouth had singed the close-cropped grass.
The rabbits ran to right and left of him, throwing distorted shadows on
the long slopes, and once a field-mouse skipped anxiously across his
path. On the rounded summit of the highest hill within reach he sat down
near a clump of tremulous harebells. The sky was on every side of him,
the largest sky ever imagined. Far away in front was the shining sea,
above whose nebulous horizon ships hung motionless. Up here was the
sound of summer airs, the faint lisp of wind in parched herbage, the
twitter of desolate birds, and in some unseen vale below the bleating of
a flock of sheep. Bumble-bees droned from flower to flower of the
harebells and a church clock struck the hour of four. The world was
opening her arms and calling to Michael. He felt up there in the silver
weather as the ugly duckling must have felt when he saw himself to be a
radiant swan. Michael almost believed, in this bewitching meditation,
that he was in a story by Hans Christian Andersen. Always in those tales
the people flew above the world whether in snow-time or in spring-time.
It was really like flying to sit up here. For the first time Michael
flung wide his arms to grasp the unattainable; and, as he presently
charged down the hill-side in answer to distant holloas from the picnic
party, he saw before him a flock of sheep manœuvring before his
advance. Michael shouted and kept a swift course, remembering Don
Quixote and laughing when he saw the flock break into units and gallop
up the opposite slope.</p>
<p>"Tut-tut," clicked Nurse. "What a mess you do get yourself into, I'm
sure. Can't you sit down and enjoy yourself quietly?"</p>
<p>"Did you see me make those silly old sheep run away, Nanny?" Michael
asked.</p>
<p>"Yes, I did. And I should be ashamed to frighten poor animals so. You'll
get the policeman on your tracks."</p>
<p>"I shouldn't care," said Michael boastfully. "He wouldn't be able to
catch me."</p>
<p>"Wouldn't he?" said Nurse very knowingly, as she laid out the tea-cups
on a red rug.</p>
<p>"Oh, Michael," Stella begged, "don't make a policeman come after you."</p>
<p>Michael was intoxicated by the thought of his future. He could not
recognize the ability of any policeman to check his desires, and because
it was impossible to voice in any other way the impulses and ambitions
and hopes that were surging in his soul, he went on boasting.</p>
<p>"Ha, I'd like to see an old policeman run after me. I'd trip him up and
roll him all down the hill, I would. I'd put his head in a rabbit hole.
I would. I can run faster than a policeman, I can."</p>
<p>Michael was swaggering round and round the spread-out cups and saucers
and plates.</p>
<p>"If you put your foot on those jam sandwiches, you'll go straight back
to the carriage and wait there till we've finished tea. Do you hear?"</p>
<p>Michael considered for a moment the possibility that Nanny might execute
this threat. He decided that she might and temporarily sobered down. But
the air was in his veins and all tea-time he could not chatter fast
enough to keep pace with the new power which was inspiring him with
inexpressible energy. He talked of what he was going to do in Hampshire;
he talked of what he was going to do on the journey; he talked of what
he was going to do at school and when he was grown up. He arranged
Stella's future and bragged and boasted and fidgeted and shouted, so
that Nurse looked at him in amazement.</p>
<p>"Whatever's the matter with you?" she asked.</p>
<p>Just then a tortoiseshell butterfly came soaring past and Michael,
swinging round on both his legs to watch the flight, swept half the
tea-cups with him. For a moment he was abashed; but after a long sermon
of reproof from Nurse he was much nearer to laughter than tears.</p>
<p>A gloomy reaction succeeded, as the party drove home through the grey
evening that was falling sadly over the country-side. A chilly wind
rustled in the hedgerows and blew the white dust in clouds behind the
wagonette. Michael became his silent self again and was now filled with
apprehensions. All that had seemed so easy to attain was now complicated
by the unknown. He would have been glad of Miss Carthew's company. The
green-shaded lamp and creaking harmonium of the seaside lodgings were a
dismal end to all that loveliness of wind and silver so soon finished.
Nevertheless it had made him very sleepy and he was secretly glad to get
to bed.</p>
<p>The next day was a dream from which he woke to find himself clinging
affectionately to Miss Carthew's arm and talking shyly to Nancy Carthew
and a sidling spaniel alternately, as they walked from the still country
station and packed themselves into a pony-chaise that was waiting
outside behind a dun pony.</p>
<h3><a id="Chapter_VI_The_Enchanted_Palace" name="Chapter_VI_The_Enchanted_Palace"></a>Chapter VI: <i>The Enchanted Palace</i></h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">T</span>HE dun pony ambled through the lanes to the village of Basingstead
Minor where Mrs. Carthew and her four daughters lived in a house called
Cobble Place. It stood close to the road and was two stories high, very
trim and covered with cotoneaster. On either side of the door were two
windows and above it in a level row five more windows: the roof was
thatched. On the left of the house were double doors which led into the
stable-yard, a large stable-yard overlooked by a number of irregular
gables in the side of the house and continually fluttered by white
fantail pigeons. Into the stable-yard the dun pony turned, where,
clustered in the side entrance of Cobble Place under a clematis-wreathed
porch, stood Mrs. Carthew and Miss May Carthew and Miss Joan Carthew,
all smiling very pleasantly at Michael and all evidently very glad to
see him safely arrived. Michael climbed out of the chaise and politely
shook hands with Mrs. Carthew and said he was very well and had had a
comfortable journey and would like some tea very much, although if Nancy
thought it was best he was quite ready to see her donkey before doing
anything else. However, Nancy was told that she must wait, and soon
Michael was sitting at a large round table in a shady dining-room,
eating hot buttered tea-cake and chocolate cake and macaroons, with
bread-and-butter as an afterthought of duty. He enjoyed drinking his tea
out of a thin teacup and he liked the silver and the satin tea-cosy and
the yellow Persian cat purring on the hearthrug and the bullfinch
flitting from perch to perch of his bright cage. He noticed with
pleasure that the pictures on the wall were full of interest and detail,
and was particularly impressed by two very long steel engravings of the
Death of Nelson and the Meeting of Wellington and Blücher on the field
of Waterloo. The only flaw in his pleasure was the difficulty of
addressing Miss May Carthew and Miss Joan Carthew, and he wished that
his own real Miss Carthew would suggest a solution. As for the bedroom
to which he was taken after tea, Michael thought there never could have
been such a jolly room before. It was just the right size, as snug as
possible with its gay wall-paper and crackling chintzes and ribboned
bed. The counterpane was patchwork and therefore held the promise of
perpetual entertainment. The dressing-table was neatly set with china
toilet articles whose individual importance Michael could not discover.
One in particular like the antler of a stag stuck upright in a china
tray he was very anxious to understand, and when he was told it was
intended for rings to hang upon, he wished he had a dozen rings to adorn
so neat a device.</p>
<p>After he had with Miss Carthew's help unpacked and put his clothes away,
Michael joined Nancy in the stable-yard. He stroked the donkey and the
dun-coloured pony and watched the fantail pigeons in snowy circles
against the pale blue sky. He watched the gardener stirring up some
strange stuff for the pig that grunted impatiently. He watched the
pleasant Carthew cook shelling peas in the slanting sunlight by the
kitchen door. The air was very peaceful, full of soft sounds of lowing
cows, of ducks and hens and sheep. The air was spangled with glittering
insects: over a red wall hung down the branch of a plum tree, loaded
with creamy ovals of fruit, already rose-flushed with summer. Nancy said
they must soon go into the garden.</p>
<p>"Is there a garden more than this?" Michael asked. His bedroom window
had looked out on to the stable-yard.</p>
<p>"Through here," said Nancy. She led the way to a door set in the wall,
which when open showed a green glowing oblong of light that made Michael
catch his breath in wonder.</p>
<p>Then together he and Nancy sauntered through what was surely the
loveliest garden in the world. Michael could scarcely bear to speak, so
completely did it fulfil every faintest hope. All along the red walls
were apples and pears and plums and peaches; all along the paths were
masses of flowers, phloxes and early Michaelmas daisies and Japanese
anemones and sunflowers and red-hot pokers and dahlias. The air was so
golden and balmy that it seemed as though the sunlight must have been
locked up in this garden for years. At the bottom of the vivid path was
a stream with real fish swimming backwards and forwards, and beyond the
stream, safely guarded and therefore perfectly beautiful, were cows
stalking through a field beyond which was a dark wood beyond which was a
high hill with a grey tower on the top of it. Some princess must have
made this garden. He and Nancy turned and walked by the stream on which
was actually moored a punt, a joy for to-morrow, since, explained Nancy,
Maud had said they were not to go on the river this afternoon. How
wonderful it was, Michael thought, to hear his dearest Miss Carthew
called Maud. Never was spoken so sweet a name as Maud. He would say it
to himself in bed that night, and in the morning he would wake with Maud
calling to him from sleep. Then he and Nancy turned from the tempting
stream and walked up a pleached alley of withies woven and interarched.
Over them September roses bloomed with fawn and ivory and copper and
salmon-pink buds and blossoms. At the end of the pleached alley was a
mulberry tree with a seat round its trunk and a thick lawn that ran
right up to the house itself. On the lawn Nancy and Michael played
quoits and bowls and chased Ambrose the spaniel, until the sun sent
still more slanting shadows across the garden and it was possible to
feel that night was just behind the hill beyond the stream. The sun went
down. The air grew chilly and Miss Carthew appeared from the door,
beckoning to Michael. She sat with him in the dusky dining-room while he
ate his bread and milk, and told him of her brother the midshipman,
while he looked pensively at the picture of the Death of Nelson. Then
Michael went to the drawing-room where all the sisters and Mrs. Carthew
herself were sitting. He kissed everybody good night in turn, and Mrs.
Carthew put on a pair of spectacles in order to follow his exit from the
room with a kindly smile. Miss Carthew sat with him while he undressed,
and when he was in bed, she told him another story and kissed him good
night and blew out the candle, and before the sound of pleasant voices
coming upstairs from the supper-table had ceased, Michael was fast
asleep.</p>
<p>In the morning while he was lying watching the shadows on the ceiling,
Nancy's freckled face appeared round the door.</p>
<p>"Hurry up and dress," she cried. "Fishing!"</p>
<p>Michael had never dressed so quickly before. In fact when he was ready,
he had to wait for Nancy who had called him before she had dressed
herself. Nancy and Michael lived a lifetime of delight in that golden
hour of waiting for breakfast.</p>
<p>However, at Cobble Place every minute was a lifetime of delight to
Michael. He forgot all about everything except being happy. His
embarrassment with regard to the correct way of addressing May and Joan
was terminated by being told to call them May and Joan. He was shown the
treasures of their bedrooms, the butterfly collections, the sword of
Captain Carthew, the dirk of their brother the midshipman, the birds'
eggs, the fossils, the bones, the dried flowers, the photographs, the
autographs, in fact everything that was most absorbing to look at. With
Mrs. Carthew he took sedate walks into the village, and held the flowers
while she decorated the altar in church, and sat with her while she
talked to bed-ridden old women. With Nancy on one memorable day he
crossed the river and disembarked on the other side and walked through
the field of cows, through the meadowsweet and purple loosestrife and
spearmint. Then they picked blackberries and dewberries by the edge of
the wood and walked on beneath the trees without caring about
trespassing or tramps or anything else. On the other side they came out
at the foot of the high hill. Up they walked, up and up until they
reached the grey tower at the top, and then, to Michael's amazement,
Nancy produced the key of the tower and opened the door.</p>
<p>"Can we really go in?" asked Michael, staggered by the adventure.</p>
<p>"Of course. We can always get the key," said Nancy.</p>
<p>They walked up some winding stone steps that smelt very damp, and at the
top they pushed open a trap-door and walked out on top of the tower.
Michael leaned over the parapet and for the second time beheld the
world. There was no sea, but there were woods and streams and spires and
fields and villages and smoke from farms. There were blue distances on
every side and great white clouds moving across the sky. The winds
battled against the tower and sang in Michael's ears and ruffled his
hair and crimsoned his cheeks. He could see the fantail pigeons of
Cobble Place circling below. He could look down on the wood and the
river they had just crossed. He could see the garden and his dearest
Miss Carthew walking on the lawn.</p>
<p>"Oh, Nancy," he said, "it's glorious."</p>
<p>"Yes, it is rather decent," Nancy agreed.</p>
<p>"I suppose that's almost all of England you can see."</p>
<p>"Only four counties," said Nancy carelessly. "Berkshire and I forget the
other three. We toboggan down this hill in winter. That's rather decent
too."</p>
<p>"I'd like to come here every day," sighed Michael. "I'd like to have
this tower for my very own. What castle is it called?"</p>
<p>"Grogg's Folly," said Nancy abruptly.</p>
<p>Michael wished the tower were not called Grogg's Folly, and very soon
Nancy and he, shouting and laughing, were running at full speed down the
hill towards Cobble Place, while the stalks of the plantains whipped his
bare legs and larks flew up in alarm before his advance.</p>
<p>The time of his stay at Cobble Place was drawing to a close: the hour of
his greatest adventure was near. It had been a visit of unspoiled
enjoyment; and on his last night, Michael was allowed for a treat to
stay up to supper, to sit at the round table rose-stained by the
brooding lamp, while the rest of the room was a comfortable mystery in
which the parlour-maid's cap and apron flitted whitely to and fro. Nor
did Michael go to bed immediately after supper, for he actually sat
grandly in the drawing-room, one of a semicircle round the autumnal fire
of logs crackling and leaping with blue flames. He sat silent, listening
to the pitter-pat of Mrs. Carthew's Patience and watching the halma
board waiting for May to encounter Joan, while in a low voice Nancy read
to him one of Fifty-two Stories of Adventure for Girls. Bed-time came at
the end of the story and Michael was sad to say good night for the last
time and sad to think, when he got into his ribboned bed, that to-morrow
night he would be in Carlington Road among brass knobs and Venetian
blinds and lamp-posts and sounds of London. Then came a great surprize
that took away nearly all the regrets he felt at leaving Cobble Place,
for Miss Carthew leaned over and whispered that she was coming to live
at Sixty-four.</p>
<p>"Oh!" Michael gasped. "With us—with Stella and me?"</p>
<p>Miss Carthew nodded.</p>
<p>"I say!" Michael whispered. "And will Stella have lessons when I'm going
to school?"</p>
<p>"Every morning," said Miss Carthew.</p>
<p>"I expect you'll find her rather bad at lessons," said Michael
doubtfully.</p>
<p>He was almost afraid that Miss Carthew might leave in despair at
Stella's ineptitude.</p>
<p>"Lots of people are stupid at first," said Miss Carthew.</p>
<p>Michael blushed: he remembered a certain morning when capes and
promontories got inextricably mixed in his mind and when Miss Carthew
seemed to grow quite tired of trying to explain the difference.</p>
<p>"Will you teach her the piano now?" he enquired.</p>
<p>"Oh dear, no. I'm not clever enough to do that."</p>
<p>"But you teach me."</p>
<p>"That's different. Stella will be a great pianist one day," said Miss
Carthew earnestly.</p>
<p>"Will she?" asked Michael incredulously. "But I don't like her to play a
bit—not a bit."</p>
<p>"You will one day. Great musicians think she is wonderful."</p>
<p>Michael gave up this problem. It was another instance of the chasm
between youth and age. He supposed that one day he would like Stella's
playing. One day, so he had been led to suppose, he would also like fat
and cabbage and going to bed. At present such a condition of mind was
incomprehensible. However, Stella and the piano mattered very little in
comparison with the solid fact that Miss Carthew was going to live in
Carlington Road.</p>
<p>On the next morning before they left, Michael and Mrs. Carthew walked
round the garden together, while Mrs. Carthew talked to him of the new
life on which he was shortly going to enter.</p>
<p>"Well, Michael," she said, "in a week, so my daughter tells me, you will
be going to school."</p>
<p>"Yes," corroborated Michael.</p>
<p>"Dear me," Mrs. Carthew went on. "I'm glad I'm not going to school for
the first time; you won't like it at all at first, and then you'll like
it very much indeed, and then you'll either go on liking it very much or
you'll hate it. If you go on liking it—I mean when you're quite
old—sixteen or seventeen—you'll never do anything, but if you hate it
then, you'll have a chance of doing something. I'm glad my daughter Maud
is going to look after you. She's a good girl."</p>
<p>Michael thought how extraordinary it was to hear Miss Carthew spoken of
in this manner and felt shy at the prospect of having to agree verbally
with Mrs. Carthew.</p>
<p>"Take my advice—never ask questions. Be content to make a fool of
yourself once or twice, but don't ask questions. Don't answer questions
either. That's worse than asking. But after all, now I'm giving advice,
and worst of anything is listening to other people's advice. So pick
yourself some plums and get ready, for the chaise will soon be at the
door."</p>
<p>Nurse was very grumpy when he and Miss Carthew arrived. She did not seem
at all pleased by the idea of Miss Carthew living in the house, and
muttered to herself all the time. Michael did no more lessons in the
week that remained before the autumn term began; but he had to go with
Miss Carthew to various outfitters and try on coats and suits and
generally be equipped for school. The afternoons he spent in Carlington
Road, trying to pick up information about St. James' Preparatory School
from the boys already there. One of these boys was Rodber, the son of a
doctor, and probably by his manner and age and appearance the most
important boy in the school. At any rate Michael found it difficult to
believe that there could exist a boy with more right to rule than this
Rodber with his haughty eye and Eton suit and prominent ears and quick
authoritative voice.</p>
<p>"Look here," said Rodber one evening, "can you borrow your mail-cart? I
saw your sister being wheeled in one this morning. We've got three
mail-carts and we want a fourth for trains."</p>
<p>Michael ran as fast as he could back to Sixty-four, rushed down the area
steps, rang the bell half a dozen times and tapped continuously on the
ground glass of the back door until Cook opened it.</p>
<p>"Whatever's the matter?" said Cook.</p>
<p>Michael did not stop to answer, but ran upstairs, until breathless he
reached the schoolroom.</p>
<p>"Please, Miss Carthew, may we have Stella's mail-cart? Rodber wants
it—for trains. Do let me. Rodber's the boy I told you about who's at
school. Oh, do let us have the cart. Rodber's got three, but he wants
ours. May I, Miss Carthew?"</p>
<p>She nodded.</p>
<p>Michael rushed downstairs in a helter-skelter of joy and presently, with
Cook's assistance in getting it up the steps, Michael stood proudly by
the mail-cart which was of the dogcart pattern, very light and swift
when harnessed to a good runner. Rodber examined it critically.</p>
<p>"Yes, that's a fairly decent one," he decided.</p>
<p>Michael was greatly relieved by his approval.</p>
<p>"Look here," said Rodber, "I don't mind telling you, as you'll be a new
kid, one or two tips about school. Look here, don't tell anybody your
Christian name and don't be cocky."</p>
<p>"Oh, no, I won't," Michael earnestly promised.</p>
<p>"And don't, for goodness' sake, look like that when chaps speak to you,
or you'll get your head smacked."</p>
<p>This was the sum of Rodber's advice, and presently Michael was stationed
as signalman by the junction which was a pillar-box, while Rodber went
off at express speed, bound for the next station which was a lamp-post.
A signalman's life on the Carlington Road line was a lonely one, and it
was also a very tiring one, when any obstruction caused the signals to
be up. Michael's arm ached excruciatingly when Rodber's train got
entangled with Garrod's train and Macalister's train had to be kept from
running into them. Moreover, the signalman's life had none of the
glories of controlling other people; a signalman on the Carlington Road
line was dependent on the train for his behaviour. He was not allowed to
interfere with the free running of any freight, but if the engine-driver
insisted he had to let him go past, and if there was an accident, he was
blamed. A signalman's life was lonely, tiring, humiliating and
dangerous.</p>
<p>These few fine days of mid-September went quickly by and one evening
Rodber said casually, almost cruelly it seemed to Michael:</p>
<p>"Well, see you to-morrow in the break, young Fane."</p>
<p>Michael wondered what on earth a 'break' was; he longed to ask Rodber,
but he dared not display at the very beginning of his career what would
evidently be a disgraceful ignorance, and so he said that he would see
Rodber in the 'break' to-morrow. He asked Miss Carthew when he got home
what a 'break' was, and she told him it was a large wagonette sometimes
driven by four horses. Michael was very much puzzled, but thought school
would be fun if large wagonettes were commonplace objects of school
life, and dreamed that night of driving furiously with Rodber in a
gigantic mail-cart along the Hammersmith Road.</p>
<p>At breakfast Miss Carthew asked Michael if he would like her to come
with him. He thought for a moment, and wished that Rodber had invited
him to accompany him that first morning.</p>
<p>"You know, it's for you to choose, Michael," said Miss Carthew.</p>
<p>"Well, I would like you to come," said Michael at last.</p>
<p>So at ten minutes past nine they set out. All sorts of boys were going
to school along the Hammersmith Road, boys of every size carrying
satchels or bags or loose bundles of books. Most of them wore the
Jacobean cap, and Michael eyed them with awe; but many wore the cap of
St. James' Preparatory School, and these Michael eyed with curiosity as
well as awe. He spoke very little during the walk and felt all the way a
sinking of the heart. When actually he reached the gate of Randell
House, the less formal appellation of St. James' Preparatory School, he
longed to turn back with Miss Carthew, as he thought with sentimental
pangs of the pleasant schoolroom and of Stella sitting by Miss Carthew,
learning to read through a sunlit morning.</p>
<p>"Don't come in with me," he whispered.</p>
<p>"Quite right," said Miss Carthew approvingly. "Much better without me."</p>
<p>"And don't wave, will you?" he begged. Then with an effort he joined the
stream of boys walking confidently through the big gate.</p>
<p>In the entrance hall a ginger-haired foxy-faced man in a green uniform
said sharply:</p>
<p>"New boy?"</p>
<p>Michael nodded.</p>
<p>"Stand on one side, please. Mr. Randell will see you presently."</p>
<p>Michael waited. He noticed with pride that the boy next to him had
brought with him either his mother or his sister or his governess.
Michael felt very superior and was glad he had resisted the temptation
to ask Miss Carthew to come in with him. He noticed how curiously the
other boys eyed this lady and fancied that they threw contemptuous
glances at the boy who had introduced her. Michael was very glad indeed
that he had let Miss Carthew turn back.</p>
<h3><a id="Chapter_VII_Randell_House" name="Chapter_VII_Randell_House"></a>Chapter VII: <i>Randell House</i></h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">T</span>HE preliminaries of Michael's career at St. James' Preparatory School
passed in a dream-like confusion of thought and action. First of all he
waited anxiously in the Headmaster's study in an atmosphere of
morocco-leather and large waste-paper baskets. Like every other room in
which Michael had waited, whether of dentist or doctor, the outlook from
the window was gloomy and the prospect within was depressing. He was
glad when Mr. Randell led him and several other boys towards the First
Form, where in a dream, peopled by the swinging legs of many boys, he
learnt from a scarlet book that while Cornelia loved Julia, Julia
returned Cornelia's affection. When this fact was established in both
English and Latin, all the boys shuffled to their desks and the record
of a great affection was set down largely and painfully.</p>
<table border="0" cellpadding="3" cellspacing="0" summary="">
<tr><td align="left">1.</td><td align="left">Cornelia Juliam amat.</td></tr>
<tr><td align="left">2.</td><td align="left">Julia Corneliam amat.</td></tr>
</table>
<p>Blotted and smudged and sprawling though it ultimately appeared, Michael
felt a great satisfaction in having dealt successfully with two
nominatives, two accusatives and a verb. The first part of the morning
passed away quickly in the history of this simple love. At eleven
o'clock a shrill electric bell throbbed through the school, and Michael,
almost before he knew what was happening, was carried in a torrent of
boys towards the playground. Michael had never felt supreme loneliness,
even at night, until he stood in the middle of that green prairie of
recreation, distinguishing nobody, a very small creature in a throng of
chattering giants. Some of these giants, who usually walked about arm in
arm, approached him.</p>
<p>"Hullo, are you a new kid?"</p>
<p>Michael breathed his 'yes.'</p>
<p>"What's your name?"</p>
<p>With an effort Michael remembered Rodber's warning and replied simply:</p>
<p>"Fane."</p>
<p>"What's your Christian name?"</p>
<p>This was a terribly direct attack, and Michael was wondering whether it
would be best to run quickly out of the playground, to keep silence or
to surrender the information, when the quick and authoritative voice of
Rodber flashed from behind him.</p>
<p>"Fish and find out, young Biden."</p>
<p>"Who are you calling young, young Rodber?"</p>
<p>"You," said Rodber. "So you'd jolly well better scoot off and leave this
kid alone."</p>
<p>"Church said I was to collar all the new kids for his army," Biden
explained.</p>
<p>"Did he? Well, this kid's in our army, so sucks! And you can tell young
Church that Pearson and me are going to jolly well lam him at four
o'clock," announced Rodber very fiercely.</p>
<p>"Why don't you tell him yourself?" asked Biden, whose teeth seemed to
project farther and farther from his mouth as his indignation grew.</p>
<p>"All right, Toothy Biden," jeered Rodber. "We'll tell the whole of your
rotten army at four o'clock, when we give you the biggest lamming you've
ever had. Come on, young Fane," he went on, and Michael, somewhat
perturbed by the prospect of being involved in these encounters,
followed at his heels.</p>
<p>"Look here," said Rodber presently, "you'd better come and show
yourself to Pearson. He's the captain of our army; and for goodness'
sake look a bit cheerful."</p>
<p>Michael forced an uncomfortable grin such as photographers conjure.</p>
<p>Under the shade of a gigantic tree stood Pearson the leader, languidly
eating a very small and very unripe pear.</p>
<p>"Hullo, Pinky," he drawled.</p>
<p>"I say, Pearson," said Rodber in a reverent voice, "I know this kid at
home. He's awfully keen to be allowed to join your army."</p>
<p>Pearson scarcely glanced at Michael.</p>
<p>"All right. Swear him in. I've got a new oath written down in a book at
home, but he can take the old one."</p>
<p>Pearson yawned and threw away the core of the pear.</p>
<p>"He's awfully glad he's going to join your army, Pearson. Aren't you,
young Fane?"</p>
<p>"Yes, awfully glad," Michael echoed.</p>
<p>"It's the best army," said Pearson simply.</p>
<p>"Oh, easily," Rodber agreed. "I say, Pearson, that kid Biden said Church
was going to lam you at four o'clock."</p>
<p>The offended Pearson swallowed a large piece of a second unripe pear and
scowled.</p>
<p>"Did he? Tell the army to line up behind the lav. at four o'clock."</p>
<p>Rodber's eyes gleamed.</p>
<p>"I say, Pearson, I've got an awfully ripping plan. Supposing we ambush
them."</p>
<p>"How?" enquired the commander.</p>
<p>"Why, supposing we put young Fane and two or three more new kids by the
tuckshop door and tell them to run towards the haunted house, we could
cop them simply rippingly."</p>
<p>"Give the orders before afternoon school," said Pearson curtly, and just
then the bell for 'second hour' sounded.</p>
<p>"Wait for me at half-past twelve," Rodber shouted to Michael as he ran
to get into school.</p>
<p>Michael grew quite feverish during 'second hour' and his brain whirled
with the imagination of battles, so that the landing of Julius Cæsar
seemed of minor importance. Tuckshops and haunted houses and doors and
ambushes and the languid pale-faced Pearson occupied his thoughts fully
enough. At a quarter-past twelve Mr. Whichelo the First Form master told
Michael and the other new boys to go to the book-room and get their
school caps, and at half-past twelve Michael waited outside on the
yellow gravel for Rodber, splendidly proud of himself in a blue cap
crested with a cockleshell worked in silver wire. He was longing to look
at himself in the glass at home and to show Miss Carthew and Stella and
Nanny and Cook and Gladys his school cap.</p>
<p>However, before he could go home Rodber took him round to where the
tuckshop ambush would ensue at four o'clock. He showed him a door in a
wall which led apparently into the narrow shady garden of an empty house
next to the school. He explained how Michael was to hang about outside
this door and when the Churchites demanded his presence, he told him
that he was to run as hard as he could down the garden towards the
house.</p>
<p>"We'll do the rest," said Rodber. "And now cut off home."</p>
<p>As soon as Michael was inside Number 64 he rushed upstairs to his
bedroom and examined himself critically in the looking-glass. Really the
new cap made a great difference. He seemed older somehow and more
important. He wished that his arms and legs were not so thin, and he
looked forward to the time when like Rodber he would wear Etons.
However, his hair was now pleasantly and inconspicuously straight: he
had already seen boys woefully teazed on account of their curls, and
Michael congratulated himself that generally his dress and appearance
conformed with the fashion of the younger boys' dress at Randell's. It
would be terrible to excite notice. In fact, Michael supposed that to
excite notice was the worst sin anybody could possibly commit. He hoped
he would never excite notice. He would like to remain perfectly
ordinary, and very slowly by an inconspicuous and gradual growth he
would thus arrive in time at the dignity and honour enjoyed by Rodber,
and perhaps even to the sacred majesty that clung to Pearson. Already he
was going to take an active part in the adventures of school; and he
felt sorry for the boys who without Rodber's influence would mildly go
straight home at four o'clock.</p>
<p>Indeed, Michael set out for afternoon school in a somewhat elated frame
of mind, and when he turned into the schoolyard, wearing the school cap,
he felt bold enough to watch a game of Conquerors that was proceeding
between two solemn-faced boys. He thought that to try to crack a
chestnut hanging on a piece of string with another chestnut similarly
suspended was a very enthralling pastime, and he was much upset when one
of the solemn-faced antagonists suddenly grabbed his new school-cap and
put it in his pocket and, without paying any attention to Michael, went
on with the game as if nothing had happened. Michael had no idea how to
grapple with the situation and felt inclined to cry.</p>
<p>"I say, give me my cap," he said at last.</p>
<p>The solemn-faced boys went on in silence with the game.</p>
<p>"I say, please give me my cap," Michael asked again.</p>
<p>No notice was taken of his appeal and Michael, looking round in despair,
saw Rodber. He ran up to him.</p>
<p>"I say, Rodber, that boy over there has got my cap," he said.</p>
<p>"Well, don't come sneaking to me, you young ass. Go and smack his
head."</p>
<p>"Am I to really?" asked Michael.</p>
<p>"Of course."</p>
<p>Michael was not prepared to withstand Rodber's advice, so he went up to
the solemn-faced boy and hit him as hard as he could. The solemn-faced
boy was so much surprized by this attack that he did not for a moment
retaliate, and it was only his friend's gasp 'I say, what fearful
cheek,' that restored him to a sense of what had happened.</p>
<p>In a moment Michael found himself lying on his back and almost smothered
by the solemn-faced boy's whole body and presently suffering agony from
the pressure of the solemn-faced boy's knees upon his arms pinioned
cross-wise. Excited voices chattered about him from an increasing
circle. He heard the solemn-faced boy telling his horrified auditors
that a new kid had smacked his head. He heard various punishments
strongly recommended, and at last with a sense of relief he heard the
quick authoritative voice of the ubiquitous Rodber.</p>
<p>"Let him get up, young Plummer. A fight! A fight!"</p>
<p>Plummer got up, as he was told, and Michael in a circle of eager faces
found himself confronted by Plummer.</p>
<p>"Go on," shouted Rodber. "I'm backing you, young Fane."</p>
<p>Michael lowered his head and charged desperately forward for the honour
of Rodber; but a terrible pain in his nose and another in his arm and a
third in his chin brought tears and blood together in such quantity that
Michael would have liked to throw himself on to the grass and weep his
life out, too weak to contend with solemn-faced boys who snatched caps.</p>
<p>Then over his misery he heard Rodber cry, 'That's enough. It's not fair.
Give him back his cap.' The crowd broke up except for a few admirers of
Rodber, who was telling Michael that he had done tolerably well for a
new kid. Michael felt encouraged and ventured to point out that he had
not really blabbed.</p>
<p>"You cocky young ass," said Rodber crushingly. "I suppose you mean
'blubbed.'"</p>
<p>Michael was overwhelmed by this rebuke and, wishing to hide his shame in
a far corner of the field, turned away. But Rodber called him back and
spoke pleasantly, so that Michael forgot the snub and wandered for the
rest of the dinner-hour in Rodber's wake, with aching nose, but with a
heart beating in admiration and affection.</p>
<p>Within a fortnight Michael had become a schoolboy, sharing in the
general ambitions and factions and prejudices and ideals of
schoolboyhood. He was a member of Pearson's victorious army; he
supported the London Road Car Company against the London General Omnibus
Company, the District Railway against the Metropolitan Railway; he was
always ready to lam young boarders who were cheeky, and when an older
boarder called him a 'day-bug' Michael was discreetly silent, merely
registering a vow to take it out of the young boarders at the first
opportunity. He also learnt to speak without blushing of the gym. and
the lav. and arith. and hols. and 'Bobbie' Randell and 'my people' and
'my kiddy sister.' He was often first with the claimant 'ego,' when
someone shouted 'quis?' over a broken pocket-knife found. He could shout
'fain I' to be rid of an obligation and 'bags I' to secure an advantage.
He was a rigid upholder of the inviolableness of Christian names as
postulated by Randellite convention. He laid out threepence a week in
the purchase of sweets, usually at four ounces a penny; while during the
beggary that succeeded he was one of the most persistent criers of
'donnez,' when richer boys emerged from the tuckshop, sucking gelatines
and satin pralines and chocolate creams and raspberry noyau. As for the
masters, he was always ready to hear scandalous rumours about their
un-official lives, and he was one of the first to fly round the
playground with the news that 'Squeaky' Mordaunt had distinctly muttered
'damn' beneath his breath, when Featherstone Minor trod on his toe
towards the close of first hour. Soon also with one of the four hundred
odd boys who made up the population of this very large private school,
Michael formed a great friendship. He and Buckley were inseparable for
sixteen whole weeks. During that time they exchanged the most intimate
confidences. Buckley told Michael that his Christian names were Claude
Arnold Eustace, and Michael told Buckley that he was called Charles
Michael Saxby, and also that his mother was generally away from home,
that his father was dead, that his governess was called Miss Carthew,
that he had a sister who played the piano and that one day when he grew
up he hoped to be an explorer and search for orchids in Borneo.
Sometimes on Saturday or Wednesday half-holidays Buckley came to tea
with Michael and sometimes Michael went to tea with Buckley, and
observed how well Buckley kept in order his young brothers and kiddy
sisters. Buckley lived close to Kensington Gardens and rode to school
every morning on a London Road Car, which was the reason of Michael's
keen partizanship of that company. In the eleven o'clock break between
first and second hours, Michael and Buckley walked arm in arm round the
field, and in the dinner-hour Michael and Buckley shared a rope on the
Giant Stride and talked intimately on the top of the horizontal ladder
in the outdoor gymnasium. During the Christmas holidays they haunted the
banks of the Round Pond and fished for minnows and sailed capsizable
yachts and cheeked keepers. Every night Michael thought of Buckley and
every night Michael hoped that Buckley thought of him. Even in
scholarship they were scarcely distinguishable; for when at the end of
the autumn term Michael was top of the class in Divinity and English,
Buckley headed the Latin list. As for Drawing they were bracketed equal
at the very bottom of the form.</p>
<p>Then towards the middle of the Lent term Randell House was divided
against itself; for one half of the school became Oxford and the other
half Cambridge, in celebration of the boat-race which would be rowed at
the end of March. When one morning Michael saw Buckley coming into
school with a light blue swallow pinned to the left of his sailor-knot
and when Buckley perceived attached to Michael's sailor-top a medal
dependent from a dark blue ribbon, they eyed each other as strangers.
This difference of opinion was irremediable. Neither romance nor
sentiment could ever restore to Michael and Buckley their pristine
cordiality, because Michael was now a despised Oxtail and Buckley was a
loathed Cabbage-stalk.</p>
<p>They shouted to one another from the heart of massed factions mocking
rhymes. Michael would chant:</p>
<p>"Oxford upstairs eating all the cakes; Cambridge downstairs licking up
the plates."</p>
<p>To which Buckley would retort:</p>
<p>"Cambridge, rowing on and on for ever; Oxford in a matchbox floating
down the river."</p>
<p>Snow fell in February, and great snow-ball fights took place between the
Oxtails and the Cabbage-stalks in which the fortunes of both sides
varied from day to day. During one of these fights Michael hit Buckley
full in the eye with a snow-ball alleged to contain a stone, and the
bitterness between them grew sharper. Then Oxford won the boat-race, and
Buckley cut Michael publicly. Finally, owing to some alteration in the
Buckley home, Buckley became a boarder, and was able with sneering voice
to call Michael a beastly 'day-bug.' Such was the friendship of Michael
and Buckley, which lasted for sixteen weeks and might not indeed have so
much wounded Michael, when the rupture was made final, if Buckley had
proved loyal to that friendship. Unfortunately for Michael's belief in
human nature Buckley one day, stung perhaps by some trifling advantage
gained by day-boys at the expense of boarders, divulged Michael's
Christian names. He called out distinctly, "Ha! ha! Charles Michael
Saxby Fane! Oh, what a name! Kiddy Michael Sacks-of-coals Fane!"</p>
<p>Michael regretted his intimacy with one who was not within the circle of
Carlington Road. In future he would not seek friends outside Carlington
Road and the six roads of the alliance. There all secrets must be kept,
and all quarrels locally adjusted, for there Christian names were known
and every household had its skeleton of nurse or governess.</p>
<p>Meanwhile, Mrs. Fane did not come home and Miss Carthew assumed more and
more complete control of Number 64, until one day in spring Nurse
suddenly told Michael that she was leaving next day. Somehow, Nurse had
ceased to influence Michael's life one way or the other, and he could
only feel vaguely uncomfortable over her departure. Nurse cried a good
deal particularly at saying good-bye to Stella, whom she called her own
girl whatever anybody might say. When Michael perceived Nurse's tears he
tried hard to drag up from the depths of his nature a dutiful
sentimentality. For the last time he kissed that puckered monkey-like
face, and in a four-wheeler Nurse vanished without making any difference
in the life of Sixty-four, save by a convenient shifting about of the
upstair rooms. The old night-nursery was redecorated and became for many
years Michael's bedroom. Miss Carthew slept in Michael's old big lonely
front room, and Stella slept in a little dressing-room opening out of
it. Down in the kitchen, whence withered Gladys and the impersonal cook
had also vanished, Michael gleaned a certain amount of gossip and found
that the immediate cause of Nurse's departure was due to Miss Carthew's
discovery of her dead drunk in a kitchen chair. It seemed that Miss
Carthew, slim and strong and beautiful, had had to carry the old woman
up to her bedroom, while Michael lay sleeping, had had to undress and
put her to bed and on the next day to contend with her asseverations
that the collapse was due to violent neuralgia. It seemed also that for
years the neighbourhood had known of Nurse's habits, had even seen her
on two occasions upset Stella's perambulator. Indeed, so far as Michael
could gather, he and Stella had lived until Miss Carthew's arrival in a
state of considerable insecurity.</p>
<p>However, Nurse was now a goblin of the past, and the past could be
easily forgotten. In these golden evenings of the summer-term, there was
too much going forward in Carlington Road to let old glooms overshadow
the gaiety of present life. As Mrs. Carthew had prophesied, Michael
enjoyed being at school very much, and having already won a prize for
being top of his class in Divinity and English at Christmas with every
prospect of being top of his class again in the summer, he was anxious
to achieve the still greater distinction of winning a prize in the
school sports which were to be held in July. All the boys who lived in
the Carlington Confederate Roads determined to win prizes, and Rodber
was very much to the fore in training them all to do him credit. It was
the fashion to choose colours in which to run, and Michael after a
week's debate elected to appear in violet running-drawers and
primrose-bordered vest. The twin Macalisters, contemporaries of Michael,
ran in cerise and eau-de-nil, while the older Macalister wore
ultramarine and mauve. Garrod chose dark green and Rodber looked
dangerously swift in black and yellow. Every evening there was steady
practice under Rodber, either in canvas shoes from lamp-post to
lamp-post or, during the actual week before the sports, in spiked
running-shoes on the grass-track, with corks to grip and a temperamental
stop-watch to cause many disputes. It was a great humiliation for the
Confederate Roads when Rodber himself failed to last the half-mile
(under 14) on the day itself. However, the Macalister twins won the
sack-race (under 11) and in the same class Michael won the hundred yards
Consolation Race and an octagonal napkin-ring, so Carlington Road
congratulated itself. In addition to athletic practice there were
several good fights with 'cads' and a disagreeable Colonel had his
dining-room window starred by a catapult. Other notable events included
a gas explosion at Number 78, when the front door was blown across the
street and flattened a passer-by against the opposite wall. There was a
burglary at Number 33 and the housemaid at Number 56 fell backwards from
the dining-room window-sill and bruised her back on the lid of the
dustbin in the area.</p>
<p>With all these excitements to sustain the joy of life Michael was very
happy and, when school broke up for the summer holidays, he had never
yet looked forward so eagerly to the jolly weeks by the sea. Miss
Carthew and Michael and Stella went to Folkestone that year, and Michael
enjoyed himself enormously. Miss Carthew, provided that she was allowed
a prior inspection, offered no opposition to friendship with strange
children, and Michael joined an association for asking everybody on the
Leas what the time was. The association would not have been disbanded
all the holidays if one of the members had not asked the time from the
same old gentleman twice in one minute. The old gentleman was so acutely
irritated by this that he walked about the Leas warning people against
the association, until it became impossible to find out the time, when
one really wanted to know. Michael moved inland for a while after this
and fell into Radnor Park pond, when he returned to the sea and got
stung by a jelly-fish while he was paddling, and read Treasure Island in
the depths of his own particular cave among the tamarisks of the Lower
Sandgate Road.</p>
<p>After about a fortnight of complete rest a slight cloud was cast over
the future by the announcement at breakfast one morning that he was to
do a couple of hours' work at French every day with a French governess:
remembering Madame Flauve, he felt depressed by the prospect. But Miss
Carthew found a charming and youthful French governess at a girls'
school, where about half a dozen girls were remaining during the
holidays, and Michael did not mind so much. He rather liked the
atmosphere of the girls' school, although when he returned to Randell's
he gave a very contemptuous account of female education to his masculine
peers. An incident happened at this girls' school which he never told,
although it made a great impression on his imagination.</p>
<p>One afternoon he had been invited to take tea with the six girls and
Mademoiselle, and after tea the weather being wet, they all played games
in the recreation-room. One of the smaller girls happened to swing
higher than decorum allowed, and caused Michael to blush and to turn his
head quickly and look intently at houses opposite. He knew that the girl
was unaware of the scandal she had created, and therefore blushed the
deeper and hoped that the matter would pass off quietly. But very soon
he heard a chatter of reproof, and the poor little girl was banished
from the room in disgrace, while all the other girls discussed the
shameful business from every point of view, calling upon Mademoiselle
and Michael to endorse their censure. Michael felt very sorry for the
poor little girl and wished very much that the others would let the
matter drop, but the discussion went on endlessly and as, just before he
went home, he happened to see the offending girl sitting by a window
with tear-stained face, Michael felt more sorry than ever and wished
that he dared to say a comforting word, to explain how well he
understood it was all an accident. On the way home, he walked silently,
meditating upon disgrace, and for the first time he realized something
of human cruelty and the lust to humiliate and submerge deeper still the
fallen. At the same time he himself experienced, in retrospect of the
incident, a certain curious excitement, and did not know whether, after
all, he had not taken pleasure in the little girl's shame, whether,
after all, he would not have liked to go back and talk the whole matter
out again. However, there was that exciting chapter in Treasure Island
to finish and the September Boy's Own Paper to expect. On the next day
Michael, walking with Miss Carthew on the Leas, met General Mace, and
girls' schools with their curious excitements and blushes were entirely
forgotten. General Mace, it appeared, was an old friend of Miss
Carthew's father and was staying by himself at Folkestone. General Mace
had fought in the Indian Mutiny and was exactly what a general should
be, very tall with a white moustache fiercely curling and a rigid back
that bent inwards like a bow and a magnificent ebony walking-stick and a
gruff voice. General Mace seemed to take a fancy to Michael and actually
invited him to go for a walk with him next day at ten o'clock.</p>
<p>"Sharp, mind," said the General as he saluted stiffly. "Ten o'clock to
the minute."</p>
<p>Michael spent the rest of the day in asking questions of Miss Carthew
about General Mace, and scarcely slept that night for fear he might be
late. At nine o'clock, Michael set out from the lodgings and ran all the
way to the General's house on the Leas, and walked about and fidgeted
and fretted himself until the clock struck the first chime of ten, when
he rang the bell and was shown upstairs and was standing on the
General's hearthrug before the echo of the last chime had died away.</p>
<p>The General cleared his throat and after saluting Michael suggested a
walk. Proudly Michael walked beside this tall old soldier up and down
the Leas. He was told tales of the Mutiny; he learned the various ranks
of the British Army from Lance-corporal to Field-marshal; he agreed at
the General's suggestion to aim at a commission in the Bengal Cavalry,
preferably in a regiment which wore an uniform of canary-yellow. Every
morning Michael walked about Folkestone with General Mace, and one
morning they turned into a toy-shop where Michael was told to choose two
boxes of soldiers. Michael at first chose a box of Highlanders doubling
fiercely with fixed bayonets and a stationary Highland Regimental Band,
each individual of which had a different instrument and actually a
music-stand as well. These two boxes together cost seven shillings, and
Michael was just leaving the shop when he saw a small penny box
containing twelve very tiny soldiers. Michael was in a quandary. For
seven shillings he would be able to buy eighty-four penny boxes, that is
to say one thousand and eight soldiers, whereas in the two boxes of
Highlanders already selected there were only twelve with bayonets,
twelve with instruments and twelve music-stands. It was really very
difficult to decide, and General Mace declined to make any suggestion as
to which would be the wiser choice, Michael was racked by indecision and
after a long debate chose the original two boxes and played with his
Highlanders for several years to come.</p>
<p>"Quite right," said the General when they reached the sunlight from the
dusty little toy-shop. "Quite right. Quality before quantity, sir. I'm
glad to see you have so much common sense."</p>
<p>Almost before the holidays seemed to have begun, the holidays were over.
There was a short and melancholy day of packing up, and a farewell visit
through the rain to General Mace. He and Michael sat for a while in his
room, while they talked earnestly of the Indian Army and the glories of
patriotism. Michael told tales, slightly exaggerated, of the exploits of
Pearson's army and General Mace described the Relief of Lucknow.
Michael felt that they were in profound sympathy: they both recognized
the splendour of action. The rain stopped, and in a rich autumnal sunset
they walked together for the last time over the golden puddles and
spangled wetness of the Leas. Michael went through the ranks of the
British Army without a single mistake, and promised faithfully to make
the Bengal Lancers his aim through youth.</p>
<p>"Punctuality, obedience and quality before quantity," said the General,
standing up as tall and thin as Don Quixote against the sunset glow.
"Good-bye."</p>
<p>"Good-bye," said Michael.</p>
<p>They saluted each other ceremoniously, and parted. The next day Michael
was in London, and after a depressing Sunday and an exciting Monday
spent in buying a Norfolk suit and Eton collars, the new term began with
all the excitements of 'moving up,' of a new form-master, of new boys,
of seeing who would be in the Football Eleven and of looking forward to
Christmas with its presents and pantomimes.</p>
<h3><a id="Chapter_VIII_Siamese_Stamps" name="Chapter_VIII_Siamese_Stamps"></a>Chapter VIII: <i>Siamese Stamps</i></h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">I</span>N the Upper Fourth class, under the tutorship of Mr. Macrae, Michael
began to prosecute seriously the study of Greek, whose alphabet he had
learnt the preceding term. He now abandoned the scarlet book of
Elementary Latin for Henry's Latin Primer, which began with 'Balbus was
building a wall,' and looked difficult in its mulberry-cloth binding.
This term in the Upper Fourth was very trying to Michael. Troubles
accumulated. Coincident with the appearance of Greek irregular verbs
came the appearance of Avery, a new boy who at once, new boy though he
was, assumed command of the Upper Fourth and made Michael the target for
his volatile and stinging shafts. Misfortune having once directed her
attention to Michael, pursued him for some time to come. Michael was
already sufficiently in awe of Avery's talent for hurting his feelings,
when from the Hebrides Mrs. Fane sent down Harris tweed for Michael's
Norfolk suits. He begged Miss Carthew to let him continue in the
inconspicuous dark blue serge which was the fashion at Randell's; but
for once she was unsympathetic, and Michael had to wear the tweed.
Avery, of course, was very witty at his expense and for a long time
Michael was known as 'strawberry-bags,' until the joke palled. Michael
had barely lived down the Harris tweed, when Avery discovered, while
they were changing into football shorts, that Michael wore combinations
instead of pants and vest. Combinations were held to be the depth of
effeminacy, and Avery often enquired when Michael was going to appear in
petticoats and stays. Michael spoke to Miss Carthew about these
combinations which at the very moment of purchase he had feared, but
Miss Carthew insisted that they were much healthier than the modish
pants and vest, and Michael was not allowed to change the style of his
underclothing. In desperation he tied some tape round his waist, but the
observant Avery noticed this ruse, and Michael was more cruelly teazed
than ever. Then one Monday morning the worst blow of all fell suddenly.
The boys at Randell's had on Saturday morning to take down from
dictation the form-list in a home-book, which had to be brought back on
Monday morning signed by a parent, so that no boy should escape the
vigilance of the paternal eye. Of course, Miss Carthew always signed
Michael's home-book and so far no master had asked any questions. But
Mr. Macrae said quite loudly on this Monday morning:</p>
<p>"Who is this Maud Carthew that signs your book, Fane?"</p>
<p>Michael felt the pricking of the form's ears and blushed hotly.</p>
<p>"My mother's away," he stammered.</p>
<p>"Oh," said Mr. Macrae bluntly, "and who is this person then?"</p>
<p>Michael nearly choked with shame.</p>
<p>"My governess—my sister's governess, I mean," he added, desperately
trying to retrieve the situation.</p>
<p>"Oh, yes," said Mr. Macrae. "I see."</p>
<p>The form tittered, while the crimson Michael stumbled back to his desk.
It was a long time before Avery grew tired of Miss Carthew or before the
class wearied of crying 'Maudie' in an united falsetto whenever Michael
ventured to speak. Mr. Macrae, too, made cruel use of his advantage, for
whenever Michael tripped over an irregular verb, Mr. Macrae would
address to the ceiling in his soft unpleasant voice sarcastic remarks
about governesses, while every Monday morning he would make a point of
putting on his glasses to examine Michael's home-book very carefully.
The climax of Michael's discomfort was reached, when a snub-nosed boy
called Jubb with a cockney accent asked him what his father was.</p>
<p>"He's dead," Michael answered.</p>
<p>"Yes, but what was he?" Jubb persisted.</p>
<p>"He was a gentleman," said Michael.</p>
<p>Avery happened to overhear this and was extremely witty over Michael's
cockiness, so witty that Michael was goaded into retaliation,
notwithstanding his fear of Avery's tongue.</p>
<p>"Well, what is your father?" he asked.</p>
<p>"My father's a duke, and I've got an uncle who's a millionaire, and my
governess is a queen," said Avery.</p>
<p>Michael was silent: he could not contend with Avery. Altogether the
Upper Fourth was a very unpleasant class; but next term Michael and half
of the class were moved up to the Lower Fifth, and Avery left to go to a
private school in Surrey, because he was ultimately destined for
Charterhouse, near which school his people had, as he said, taken a
large house. Curiously enough the combination of half the Upper Fourth
with the half of the Lower Fifth left behind made a rather pleasant
class, one that Michael enjoyed as much as any other so far,
particularly as he was beginning to find that he was clever enough to
avoid doing as much school-work as hitherto he had done, without in any
way permanently jeopardizing his position near the top of the form. To
be sure Mr. Wagstaff, the cherub-faced master of the Lower Fifth,
complained of his continually shifting position from one end of the
class to the other; but Michael justified himself and incidentally
somewhat annoyed Mr. Wagstaff by coming out head boy in the Christmas
examinations. Meanwhile, if he found Greek irregular verbs and Latin
gender rhymes tiresome, Michael read unceasingly at home, preferably
books that encouraged the private schoolboy's instinct to take sides.
Michael was for the Trojans against the Greeks, partly on account of the
Greek verbs, but principally because he once had a straw hat inscribed
H.M.S. Hector. He was also for the Lancastrians against the Yorkists,
and, of course, for the Jacobites against the Hanoverians. Somewhat
illogically, he was for the Americans against the English, because as
Miss Carthew pointed out he was English himself and the English were
beaten. She used to teaze Michael for nearly always choosing the beaten
side. She also used to annoy him by her assertion that in taking the
part of the Americans in the War of Independence, he showed that most of
his other choices were only due to the books he read. She used to make
him very angry by saying that he was at heart a Roundhead and a Whig,
and even hinted that he would grow up a Radical. This last insinuation
really annoyed him very much indeed, because at Randell House no boy
could be anything but a Conservative without laying himself open to the
suggestion that he was not a gentleman.</p>
<p>In time, after an absence of nearly two years, Mrs. Fane came home for a
long time; but Michael did not feel any of those violent emotions of joy
that once he used to feel when he saw her cab rounding the corner. He
was shy of his mother, and she for her part seemed shy of him and told
Miss Carthew that school had not improved Michael. She wondered, too,
why he always seemed anxious to be playing with other boys.</p>
<p>"It's quite natural," Miss Carthew pointed out.</p>
<p>"Darling Michael. I suppose it is," Mrs. Fane agreed vaguely. "But he's
so grubby and inky nowadays."</p>
<p>Michael maintained somewhat indignantly that all the boys at Randell's
were like him, for he was proud that by being grubby and inky no boy
could detect in him any inclination to differentiate himself from the
mass. At Randell's, where there was one way only of thinking and
behaving and speaking, it would have been grossly cocky to be brushed
and clean. Michael resented his mother's attempt to dress him nicely and
was almost rude when she suggested ideas for charming and becoming
costumes.</p>
<p>"I do think boys are funny," she used to sigh.</p>
<p>"Well, mother," Michael would argue, "if I wore a suit like that, all
the other boys would notice it."</p>
<p>"But I think it's nice to be noticed," Mrs. Fane would contend.</p>
<p>"I think it's beastly," Michael always said.</p>
<p>"I wish you wouldn't use that horrid word," his mother would say
disapprovingly.</p>
<p>"All the boys do," was Michael's invariable last word.</p>
<p>Then, "Michael," Miss Carthew would say sharply, as she fixed him with
that cold look which he so much dreaded. Michael would blush and turn
away, abashed; while Stella's company would be demanded by his mother
instead of his, and Stella would come into the room all lily-rosed
beside her imp-like brother.</p>
<p>Stella was held by Michael to be affected, and he would often point out
to her how little such behaviour would be tolerated at a boys' school.
Stella's usual reply was to pout, a form of expression which came under
the category of affectations, or she would cry, which was a degree worse
and was considered to be as good as sneaking outright. Michael often
said he hoped that school would improve Stella's character and
behaviour; yet when she went to school, Michael thought that not only
was she none the better for the experience, but he was even inclined to
suggest that she was very much the worse. Tiresome little girl friends
came to tea sometimes and altered Michael's arrangements; and when they
came they used to giggle in corners and Stella used to show off
detestably. Once Michael was so much vexed by a certain Dorothy that he
kissed her spitefully, and a commotion ensued from the middle of which
rose Miss Carthew, grey-eyed and august like Pallas Athene in The
Heroes. It seemed to Michael that altogether too much importance was
attached to this incident. He had merely kissed Dorothy in order to show
his contempt for her behaviour. One would think from the lecture given
by Miss Carthew that it was pleasant to kiss giggling little girls.
Michael felt thoroughly injured by the imputation of gallantry, and
sulked instead of giving reasons.</p>
<p>"I really think your mother is right," Miss Carthew said at last. "You
are quite different from the old Michael."</p>
<p>"I didn't want to kiss her," he cried, exasperated.</p>
<p>"Doesn't that make it all the worse?" Miss Carthew suggested.</p>
<p>Michael shrugged his shoulders feeling powerless to contend with all
this stupidity of opinion.</p>
<p>"Surely," said Miss Carthew at last, "Don Quixote or General Mace or
Henry V wouldn't have kissed people against their will in order to be
spiteful."</p>
<p>"They might," argued Michael; "if rotten little girls came to tea and
made them angry."</p>
<p>"I will not have that word 'rotten' used in front of me," Miss Carthew
said.</p>
<p>"Well, fat-headed then," Michael proposed as a euphemism.</p>
<p>"The truth is," Miss Carthew pointed out, "you were angry because you
couldn't have the Macalisters to tea and you vented your anger on poor
Stella and her friends. I call it mean and unchivalrous."</p>
<p>"Well, Stella goes to mother and asks for Dorothy to come to tea, when
you told me I could have the Macalisters, and I don't see why I should
always have to give way."</p>
<p>"Boys always give way to girls," generalized Miss Carthew.</p>
<p>"I don't believe they do nowadays," said Michael.</p>
<p>"I see it's hopeless to argue any more. I'm sorry you won't see you're
in the wrong. It makes me feel disappointed."</p>
<p>Michael again shrugged his shoulders.</p>
<p>"I don't see how I can possibly ask your mother to let Nancy stay here
next Christmas. I suppose you'll be trying to kiss her."</p>
<p>Michael really had to laugh at this.</p>
<p>"Why, I like Nancy awfully," he said. "And we both think kissing is
fearful rot—I mean frightfully stupid. But I won't do it again, Miss
Carthew. I'm sorry. I am really."</p>
<p>There was one great advantage in dealing with Miss Carthew. She was
always ready to forgive at once, and, as Michael respected her enough to
dislike annoying her, he found it perfectly easy to apologize and be
friends—particularly as he had set his heart on Nancy's Christmas
visit.</p>
<p>Carlington Road and the Confederate Roads were now under the control of
Michael and his friends. Rodber had gone away to a public school: the
elder Macalister and Garrod had both got bicycles which occupied all
their time: Michael, the twin Macalisters and a boy called Norton were
in a very strong position of authority. Norton had two young brothers
and the Macalisters had one, so that there were three slaves in
perpetual attendance. It became the fashion to forsake the school field
for the more adventurous wasteland of the neighbourhood. At the end of
Carlington Road itself still existed what was practically open country
as far as it lasted. There were elm-trees and declivities and broken
hedges and the excavated hollows of deserted gravel-pits. There was an
attractive zigzag boundary fence which was sufficiently ruinous at
certain intervals to let a boy through to wander in the allotments of
railway workers. Bands of predatory 'cads' prowled about this
wasteland, and many were the fierce fights at sundown between the cads
and the Randellites. Caps were taken for scalps, and Miss Carthew was
horrified to observe nailed to Michael's bedroom wall the filthiest cap
she had ever seen.</p>
<p>Apart from the battles there were the luxurious camps, where cigarettes
at five a penny were smoked to the last puff and were succeeded by the
consumption of highly scented sweets to remove the traces of tobacco.
These camps were mostly pitched in the gravelly hollows, where Michael
and the Macalisters and Norton used to sit round a camp-fire on the warm
evenings of summer, while silhouetted against the blue sky above stood
the minor Macalister and the junior Nortons in ceaseless vigilance. The
bait held out to these sentries, who sometimes mutinied, was their
equipment with swords, guns, pistols, shields, bows, arrows and
breastplates. So heavily and decoratively armed and sustained by the
prospect of peppermint bull's-eyes, Dicky Macalister and the two Nortons
were content for an hour to scan the horizon for marauding cads, while
down below the older boys discussed life in all its ambiguity and
complication. These symposiums in the gravel-pit tried to solve certain
problems in a very speculative manner.</p>
<p>"There must be <i>some</i> secret about being married," said Michael one
Saturday afternoon, when the sun blazed down upon the sentries and the
last cigarette had been smoked.</p>
<p>"There <i>is</i>," Norton agreed,</p>
<p>"I can't make out about twins," Michael continued, looking critically at
the Macalisters.</p>
<p>Siegfried Macalister, generally known as 'Smack' in distinction to his
brother Hugh always called 'Mac,' felt bound to offer a suggestion.</p>
<p>"There's twenty minutes' difference between us. I heard my mater tell a
visitor, and besides I'm the eldest."</p>
<p>Speculation was temporarily interrupted by a bout between Smack and Mac,
because neither was allowed to claim priority. At the end of an
indecisive round Michael struck in:</p>
<p>"But why are there twins? People don't like twins coming, because in
Ally Sloper there's always a joke about twins."</p>
<p>"I know married people who haven't got any children at all," said Norton
in order still more elaborately to complicate the point at issue.</p>
<p>"Yes, there you are," said Michael. "There's some secret about
marriage."</p>
<p>"There's a book in my mater's room which I believe would tell us,"
hinted Smack.</p>
<p>"There's a good deal in the Bible," Norton observed. "Only it's
difficult to find the places and then you can't tell for certain what
they mean."</p>
<p>Then came a long whispering at the end of which the four boys shook
their heads very wisely and said that they were sure that was it.</p>
<p>"Hullo!" Michael shouted, forgetting the debate. "Young Dicky's
signalling."</p>
<p>"Indians," said Mac.</p>
<p>"Sioux or Apaches?" asked Smack anxiously.</p>
<p>"Neither. It's Arabs. Charge," shouted Norton.</p>
<p>All problems went to the winds in the glories of action, in the clash of
stick on stick, in the rending of cad's collar and cad's belt, and in
the final defeat of the Arabs with the loss of their caravan—a
sugar-box on a pair of elliptical wheels.</p>
<p>In addition to the arduous military life led by Michael at this period,
he was also in common with Smack and Mac and Norton a multiplex
collector. At first the two principal collections were silkworms and
silver-paper. Afterwards came postage stamps and coins and medals and
autographs and birds' eggs and shells and fossils and bones and skins
and butterflies and moths and portraits of famous cricketers. From the
moment the first silkworm was brought home in a perforated cardboard-box
to the moment when by some arrangement of vendible material the first
bicycle was secured, the greater part of Michael's leisure was
mysteriously occupied in swapping. This swapping would continue until
the mere theory of swapping for swapping's sake as exemplified in a
paper called The Exchange and Mart was enough. When this journal became
the rage, the most delightful occupation of Michael and his friends was
that of poring over the columns of this medium of barter in order to
read of X.Y.Z. in Northumberland who was willing to exchange five Buff
Orpingtons, a suit, a tennis racket and Cowper's Poems for a mechanical
organ or a 5 ft. by 4 ft. greenhouse. All the romance of commerce was to
be found in The Exchange and Mart together with practical hints on the
moulting of canaries or red mange in collies. Cricket was in the same
way made a mathematical abstraction of decimals and initials and
averages and records. All sorts of periodicals were taken in—Cricket,
The Cricketer, Cricketing amongst many others. From an exact perusal of
these, Michael and the Macalisters knew that Streatham could beat
Hampstead and were convinced of the superiority of the Incogniti C.C.
over the Stoics C.C. With the collections of cricketers' portraits some
of these figures acquired a conceivable personality; but, for the most
part, they remained L.M.N.O.P.Q. Smith representing 36·58 an innings and
R.S.T.U.V.W. Brown costing 11·07 a wicket. That they wore moustaches,
lived and loved like passionate humanity did not seem to matter compared
with the arithmetical progression of their averages. When Michael and
Norton (who was staying with him at St. Leonards) were given shillings
and told to see the Hastings' Cricket Week from the bowling of the
first ball to the drawing of the final stump, Michael and Norton were
very much bored indeed, and deprecated the waste of time in watching
real cricket, when they might have been better occupied in collating the
weekly cricketing journals.</p>
<p>At Christmas Michael emerged from a successful autumn term with Stories
from the Odyssey by Professor Church and a chestnut that was reputed to
have conquered nine hundred and sixty-six other and softer chestnuts.
That nine hundred and sixty-sixer of Michael's was a famous nut, and the
final struggle between it (then a five hundred and forty-oner) and the
four hundred and twenty-fourer it smashed was a contest long talked of
in circles where Conquerors were played. Michael much regretted that the
etiquette of the Lent term, which substituted peg-tops for Conquerors,
should prevent his chestnut reaching four figures. He knew that next
autumn term, if all fell out as planned, he would be at St. James'
School itself, where Conquerors and tops and marbles were never even
mentioned, save as vanities and toys of early youth. However, he swapped
the nine hundred and sixty-sixer for seven white mice and a slow-worm in
spirits of wine belonging to Norton; and he had the satisfaction of
hearing later on that after a year in rejuvenating oil the nine hundred
and sixty-sixer became a two thousand and thirty-threer before it fell
down a drain, undefeated.</p>
<p>After Christmas Nancy Carthew came up from Hampshire to spend a
fortnight at Carlington Road, and the holidays were spent in a fever of
theatres and monuments and abbeys. Michael asked Nancy what she thought
of Stella and her affectation, and was surprized by Nancy saying she
thought Stella was an awfully jolly kid and 'no end good' at the piano.
Michael in consideration of Nancy's encomium tried to take a fresh view
of Stella and was able sincerely to admit that, compared with many other
little girls of the neighbourhood, Stella was fairly pretty. He decided
that it would be a good thing for Norton to marry her. He told Norton
that there seemed no reason why he and Stella should not come together
in affection, and Norton said that, if Michael thought he should, he was
perfectly willing to marry Stella, when he was grown up. Michael
thereupon swapped a box of somewhat bent dragoons for a ring, and
presented this ring to Norton with the injunction that he should on no
account tell Stella that he was engaged to her, in case it made her
cocky. He also forbade Norton to kiss her (not that he supposed Norton
wanted to kiss Stella), because Miss Carthew would be annoyed and might
possibly close the area door to Norton for the future.</p>
<p>When Nancy went back to Hampshire, Michael felt lonely. The Macalisters
and the Nortons had gone away on visits, and Carlington Road was dreary
without them. Michael read a great deal and by reason of being at home
he gradually became less grubby, as the holidays wore on. Also his hair
grew long and waved over his forehead with golden lights and shadows and
curled in bunches by his ears. A new Eton suit well became him, and his
mother said how charming he looked. Michael deplored good looks in boys,
but he managed to endure the possession of them during the little space
that remained before the Lent term began. He took to frequenting the
drawing-room again as of old and, being nowadays allowed to stay up till
a quarter to nine, he used to spend a rosy half-hour after dinner
sitting on a footstool in the firelight by his mother's knee. She used
to stroke his hair and sigh sometimes, when she looked at him.</p>
<p>One afternoon just before term began Mrs. Fane told him to make himself
as tidy as possible, because she wanted to take him out to pay a call.
Michael was excited by this notion, especially when he heard that they
were to travel by hansom, a form of vehicle which he greatly admired.
The hansom bowled along the Kensington Road with Michael in his Eton
suit and top-hat sitting beside his mother scented sweetly with
delicious perfumes and very silky to the touch. They drove past
Kensington Gardens all dripping with January rains, past Hyde Park and
the Albert Memorial, past the barracks of the Household Cavalry, past
Hyde Park Corner and the Duke of Wellington's house. They dashed along
with a jingle and a rattle over the slow old omnibus route, and Michael
felt very much distinguished as he turned round to look at the
melancholy people crammed inside each omnibus they passed. When they
came to Devonshire House, they turned round to the left and pulled up
before a grand house in a square. Michael pressed the bell, and the door
opened immediately, much more quickly than he had ever known a door
open.</p>
<p>"Is his lordship in?" asked Mrs. Fane.</p>
<p>"His lordship is upstairs, ma'am," said the footman.</p>
<p>The hall seemed full of footmen, one of whom took Michael's hat and
another of whom led the way up a wide soft staircase that smelt like the
inside of the South Kensington Museum. All the way up, the walls were
hung with enormous pictures of men in white wigs. Presently they stood
in the largest room Michael had ever entered, a still white room full of
golden furniture. Michael had barely recovered his breath from
astonishment at the size of the room, when he saw another room round the
corner, in which a man was sitting by a great fire. When the footman had
left the room very quietly, this man got up and held Mrs. Fane's hand
for nearly a minute. Then he looked at Michael, curiously, Michael
thought, so curiously as to make him blush.</p>
<p>"And this is the boy?" the gentleman asked.</p>
<p>Michael thought his mother spoke very funnily, as if she were just going
to cry, when she answered:</p>
<p>"Yes, this is Michael."</p>
<p>"My God, Valérie," said the man, "it makes it harder than ever."</p>
<p>Michael took the opportunity to look at this odd man and tried to think
where he had seen him before. He was sure he had seen him somewhere. But
every time just as he had almost remembered, a mist came over the
picture he was trying to form, so that he could not remember.</p>
<p>"Well, Michael," said the gentleman, "you don't know who I am."</p>
<p>"Ah, don't, Charles," said Mrs. Fane.</p>
<p>"Well, he's not so wise as all that," laughed the gentleman.</p>
<p>Michael thought it was a funny laugh, more sad than cheerful.</p>
<p>"This is Lord Saxby," said Mrs. Fane.</p>
<p>"I say, my name is Saxby," Michael exclaimed.</p>
<p>"Nonsense," said Lord Saxby, "I don't believe it."</p>
<p>"It is really. Charles Michael Saxby Fane."</p>
<p>"Well, that's a very strange thing," said Lord Saxby.</p>
<p>"Yes, I think it's awfully funny," Michael agreed. "Because I never
heard of anyone called Saxby. My name's Charles too. Only, of course,
that's quite a common name. But nobody at our school knows I'm called
Saxby except a boy called Buckley who's an awful beast. We don't tell
our Christian names, you know. If a chap lets out his Christian name he
gets most frightfully ragged by the other chaps. Chaps think you're an
awfully silly ass if you let out your Christian name."</p>
<p>Michael was finding it very easy to talk.</p>
<p>"I must hear some more about this wonderful school," Lord Saxby
declared.</p>
<p>Then followed a delightful conversation in which due justice was done to
the Macalister twins and to Norton, and to the life they shared with
Michael.</p>
<p>"By gad, Valérie, he ought to go to Eton, you know," declared Lord
Saxby, turning to Michael's mother.</p>
<p>"No, no. I'm sure you were right, when you said St. James'," persisted
Mrs. Fane.</p>
<p>"Perhaps I was," Lord Saxby sighed. "Well, Valérie—not again. It's too
damnably tantalizing."</p>
<p>"I thought just once while he was still small," said Mrs. Fane softly.
"Photographs are so unsatisfactory. And you haven't yet heard Stella
play."</p>
<p>"Valérie, I couldn't. Look at this great barrack of a house. If you only
knew how I long sometimes for—what a muddle it all is!"</p>
<p>Then a footman came in with tea, and Michael wondered what dinner was
like in this house, if mere tea were so grand and silvery.</p>
<p>"I think I must drive you back in the phaeton," said Lord Saxby.</p>
<p>"No, no, Charles. No more rules must be broken."</p>
<p>"Yes, I suppose you're right. But don't—not again, please. I can't bear
to think of the 'ifs.'"</p>
<p>Then Lord Saxby turned to Michael.</p>
<p>"Look here, young man, what do you want most?"</p>
<p>"Oh, boxes of soldiers and an unused set of Siamese," said Michael.</p>
<p>"Siamese what? Siamese cats?"</p>
<p>"No, you silly," laughed Michael, "Stamps, of course!"</p>
<p>"Oh, stamps," said Lord Saxby. "Right—and soldiers, eh? Good."</p>
<p>All the way back in the hansom Michael wished he had specified Artillery
to Lord Saxby; but two days afterwards dozens of boxes of all kinds of
soldiers arrived, and unused sets not merely of Siamese, but of North
American Tercentenaries and Borneos and Labuans and many others.</p>
<p>"I say," Michael gasped, "he's a ripper, isn't he? What spiffing boxes!
I say, he is a decent chap, isn't he? When are we going to see Lord
Saxby again, mother?"</p>
<p>"Some day."</p>
<p>"I can have Norton to tea on Wednesday, can't I?" begged Michael. "He'll
think my soldiers are awfully ripping."</p>
<p>"Darling Michael," said his mother.</p>
<p>"Mother, I will try and not be inky," said Michael in a burst of
affectionate renunciation.</p>
<p>"Dearest boy," said his mother gently.</p>
<h3><a id="Chapter_IX_Holidays_in_France" name="Chapter_IX_Holidays_in_France"></a>Chapter IX: <i>Holidays in France</i></h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">I</span>N Michael's last term at St. James' Preparatory School, Mrs. Fane
settled that he should for the holidays go to France with Mr. Vernon and
Mr. Lodge, two masters who were accustomed each year to take a few boys
away with them to the coast of Brittany. Five boys were going this
summer—Michael and Hands and Hargreaves and Jubb and Rutherford; and
all five of them bragged about their adventure for days before school
broke up. Miss Carthew drove with Michael to Victoria Station and handed
him over to Mr. Lodge who was walking about in a very thick and romantic
overcoat. Mr. Lodge was a clean-shaven, large-faced and popular master,
and Mr. Vernon was an equally popular master, deep-voiced,
heavy-moustached, hook-nosed. In fact it was impossible to say which of
the two one liked the better. Mr. Lodge at once produced two packets of
Mazawattee tea which he told Michael to put in his pocket and say
nothing about when he landed in France, and when Hands, Hargreaves,
Rutherford and Jubb arrived, they were all given packets of tea by Mr.
Lodge and told to say nothing about them when they landed in France. Mr.
Vernon appeared, looking very business-like and shouting directions
about the luggage to porters, while Mr. Lodge gathered the boys together
and steered them through the barrier on to the platform and into the
train for Newhaven. The steamer by which they were going to cross was
not an ordinary packet-boat, but a cargo-boat carrying vegetable ivory.
For Channel voyagers they were going to be a long while at sea, calling
at Havre and afterwards rounding Cherbourg and Brest, before they
reached St. Corentin, the port of their destination at the mouth of the
Loire. It was rough weather all the way to Havre, and Michael was too
ill to notice much the crew or the boat or any of the other boys.
However, the excitement of disembarking at Havre about midnight put an
end to sea-sickness, for it was very thrilling at such an hour to follow
Mr. Lodge and Mr. Vernon through the gloomy wharves and under their
dripping archways. When after this strange walk, they came to a wide
square and saw cafés lighted up and chairs and tables in the open air
before the doors, Michael felt that life was opening out on a vista of
hitherto unimagined possibilities. They all sat down at midnight,
wrapped up in their travelling coats and not at all too much tired to
sip grenadine sucrée and to crunch Petit Beurre biscuits. Michael
thought grenadine sucrée was just as nice as it looked and turned to
Hands, a skull-headed boy who was sitting next to him:</p>
<p>"I say, this is awfully decent, isn't it?"</p>
<p>"Rather," squeaked Hands in his high voice. "Much nicer than
Pineappleade."</p>
<p>After they had stayed there for a time, watching isolated passers-by
slouch across the wind-blown square, Mr. Lodge announced they must hurry
back to the boat and get a good night's sleep. Back they went between
the damp walls of the shadowy wharves, plastered with unfamiliar
advertizements, until they reached their boat and went to bed. In the
morning when Michael woke up, the steamer was pitching and rolling:
everything in the cabin was lying in a jumble on the floor, and
Rutherford and Hargreaves were sitting up in their bunks wideawake.
Rutherford was the oldest boy of the party and he was soon going in for
his Navy examination; but he had been so sea-sick the day before that
Michael felt that he was just as accessible as the others and was no
longer afraid to talk to this hero without being spoken to first.
Rutherford, having been so sick, felt bound to put on a few airs of
grandeur; but he was pleasant enough and very full of information about
many subjects which had long puzzled Michael. He spoke with authority on
life and death and birth and love and marriage, so that when Michael
emerged into the wind from the jumbled cabin, he felt that to dress
beside Rutherford was an event not easily to be forgotten: but later on
as he paced the foam-spattered deck, and meditated on the facts of
existence so confidently revealed, he began to fear that the learned
Rutherford was merely a retailer of unwarranted legends. Still he had
propounded enough for Michael, when he returned to Carlington Road, to
theorize upon and impart to the Macalisters; and anyway, without
bothering about physiological problems, it was certainly splendid to
walk about the deck in the wind and rain, and no longer to hate, but
even to enjoy the motion of the boat. It was exhilarating to clamber
right up into the bows among coils of rope and to see how the boat
charged through the spuming water. Michael nearly made up his mind to be
a sailor instead of a Bengal Lancer, and looked enviously at the ship's
boy in his blue blouse. But presently he heard a savage voice, and one
of the sailors so much admired kicked the ship's boy down the companion
into the forecastle. Michael was horrified when, late in the grey and
stormy afternoon, he heard cries of pain from somewhere down below. He
ran to peer into the pit whence they came, and in the half-light he
could see a rope's-end clotted with blood. This sight dismayed him, and
he longed to ask Mr. Lodge or Mr. Vernon to interfere and save the poor
ship's boy, but a feeling of shame compelled silence and, though he was
sincerely shocked by the thought of the cruel scenes acted down there in
the heart of the ship, he could not keep back a certain exultation and
excitement similar to that which he had felt at Folkestone in the
girls' school last summer.</p>
<p>Soon the steamer with its cargo of vegetable ivory and tortured ship's
boy and brutal crew were all forgotten in the excitement of arriving at
St. Corentin, of driving miles into the country until they reached the
house where they were going to spend six weeks. It was an old house set
far back from the high road and reached by a long drive between
pollarded acacias. All round the house were great fig trees and pear
trees and plum trees. The garden was rank with unpruned gooseberry and
currant bushes, untidy with scrambling gourds and grape vines. It was a
garden utterly unlike any garden that Michael had ever known. There
seemed to be no flowers in this overwhelming vegetation which matted
everything. It was like the garden of the Sleeping Beauty's palace. The
crumbling walls were webbed with briars; their foundations were buried
in thickets of docks and nettles, and the fruit trees that grew against
them had long ago broken loose from any restraint. It was a garden that
must surely take a very long time to explore, so vast was it, so
trackless, so much did every corner demand a slow advance.</p>
<p>When the boys had unpacked and when they had been introduced to Mrs.
Wylde, the mistress of the house, and when they had presented to her the
packets of Mazawattee tea and when they themselves had eaten a
deliciously novel dinner at the unusual hour of six, they all set out to
explore the luxuriant wilderness behind the house. Mr. Vernon and Mr.
Lodge shouted to them to eat only the ripe fruit and with this solitary
injunction left them to their own amusements until bed-time. Rutherford,
Hargreaves and Jubb at once set out to find ripe fruit, and as the first
tree they came to was loaded with greengages, Rutherford, Hargreaves and
Jubb postponed all exploration for the present. Michael and Hands, who
was sleeping in his room and with whom he had already made friends,
left the others behind them. As they walked farther from the house, they
spoke in low tones, so silent was this old garden.</p>
<p>"I'm sure it's haunted," said Michael. "I never felt so funny, not
exactly frightened, you know, but sort of frightened."</p>
<p>"It's still quite light," squeaked the hopeful Hands.</p>
<p>"Yes, but the sun's behind all these trees and you can't hear anything,
but only us walking," whispered Michael.</p>
<p>However, they went on through a jungle of artichokes and through an
orchard of gnarled apple trees past a mildewed summer-house, until they
reached a serpentine path between privet bushes, strongly scented in the
dampness all around.</p>
<p>"Shall we?" murmured Hands doubtfully.</p>
<p>"Yes. We can bunk back if we see anything," said Michael. "I like this."</p>
<p>They walked on following the zigzags of the path, but stopped dead as a
blackbird shrilled and flapped into the bushes affrighted.</p>
<p>"By Jove, that beastly bird made me awfully funky," said Michael.</p>
<p>"Let's go back," said Hands. "Suppose we got murdered. People do in
France."</p>
<p>"Rot," said Michael. "Not in a private garden, you cuckoo."</p>
<p>With mutual encouragement the two boys wandered on, until they found
farther progress barred by a high hedge, impenetrable apparently and
viewless to Michael and Hands who were not very tall.</p>
<p>"What sucks!" said Michael. "I hate turning back. I think it's rotten to
turn back. Don't you? Hullo!" he cried. "Look here, Hands. Here's a
regular sort of tunnel going down hill. It's quite steep."</p>
<p>In a moment Hands and Michael were half sliding, half climbing down a
cliff. The lower they went, the faster they travelled and soon they were
sliding all the way, because they had to guard their faces against the
brambles that twined above them.</p>
<p>"Good Lord!" gasped Michael, as he bumped down a sheer ten-feet of loose
earth. "I'm getting jolly bumped. Look out, Hands, you kicked my neck,
you ass."</p>
<p>"I can't help it," gasped Hands. "I'm absolutely slipping, and if I try
to catch hold, I scratch myself."</p>
<p>They were sliding so fast that the only thing to do was to laugh and
give way. So, with shouts and laughter and bumps and jolts and the
pushing of loose stones and earth before them, Michael and Hands came
with a run to the bottom of the cliff and landed at last on soft
sea-sand.</p>
<p>"By gum," said Michael, "we're right on the beach. What a rag!"</p>
<p>The two boys looked back to the scene of their descent. It was a high
cliff covered with shrubs and brambles, apparently unassailable. Before
them was the sea, pale blue and gold, and to the right and to the left
were the flat lonely sands. They ran, shouting with excitement, towards
the rippling tide. The sand-hoppers buzzed about their ankles: Hands
tripped over a jelly-fish and fell into several others: sea-gulls
swooped above them, crying continually.</p>
<p>"It's like Robinson Crusoe," Michael declared.</p>
<p>He was mad with the exhilaration of possession. He owned these sands.</p>
<p>"Oh, young Hands fell down on the sands," he cried, bursting into
uncontrollable laughter at the absurdity of the rhyme. Then he found
razor-shells and waved his arms triumphantly. He found, too,
wine-stained shells and rosy shells and great purple mussels. He and
Hands took off their shoes and stockings and ran through the limpid
water that sparkled with gold and tempted them to wade for ever ankle
deep. They reached a broken mass of rock which would obviously be
surrounded by water at high tide; they clambered up to the summit and
found there grass and rabbits' holes.</p>
<p>"It's a real island," said Michael. "It is! I say, Hands, this is our
island. We discovered it. Bags I, we keep it."</p>
<p>"Don't let's get caught by the tide," suggested cautious Hands.</p>
<p>"All right, you funk," jeered Michael.</p>
<p>They came back to the level sands and wandered on towards the black
point of cliff bounding the immediate view.</p>
<p>"I say, there's a cave. I bet you there's a cave," Michael called to his
companion who was examining a dead fish.</p>
<p>"Wait a jiffy," shouted Hands; but Michael hurried on to the cave. He
wanted to be the first to enter under its jagged arch. Already he could
see the silver sand shimmering upon the threshold of the inner darkness.
He walked in, awed by the secrecy of this sea-cavern, almost expectant
of a mermaid or octopus in the deepest cranny. Suddenly he stopped. His
heart beat furiously: his head swam: his legs quivered under him. Then
he turned and ran towards the light.</p>
<p>"Good lummy!" said Hands, when Michael came up to him. "Whatever's the
matter? You're simply frightfully white."</p>
<p>"Come away," said Michael. "I saw something beastly."</p>
<p>"What was it?"</p>
<p>"There's a man in there and a woman. Oh, it was beastly."</p>
<p>Michael dragged Hands by the arm, but not before they had left the cave
far behind would he speak.</p>
<p>"What was it really?" asked Hands, when they stood at the bottom of the
cliff.</p>
<p>"I couldn't possibly tell anybody ever," said Michael.</p>
<p>"You're making it up," scoffed Hands.</p>
<p>"No, I'm not," said Michael. "Look here, don't say anything to the
others about that cave. Promise."</p>
<p>Hands promised silence; and he and Michael soon discovered a pathway up
the cliff. When they reached the garden, it was a deeper green than ever
in the falling twilight, and they did not care to linger far from the
house. It was a relief to hear voices and to see Rutherford, Hargreaves
and Jubb still eating plums. Presently they played games on a lawn with
Mr. Vernon and Mr. Lodge, and soon, after reading sleepily for a while
in the tumble-down room which was set apart for the boys' use, Michael
and Hands went to bed and, after an exciting encounter with a bat, fell
asleep.</p>
<p>The days in Brittany went by very swiftly. In the morning at eight
o'clock there were great bowls of café au lait and rolls with honey and
butter waiting in the dining-room for the boys, when they came back from
bathing. All the other boys except Michael had come to France to improve
their French; but he worked also at the first book of Ovid's
Metamorphoses and at Lucian's Charon, because he was going in for a
scholarship at St. James'. However, these classical subjects were put
away at eleven o'clock, when déjeuner with all sorts of new and
delicious dishes was served. After this there was nothing to do until
six o'clock but enjoy oneself. Sometimes the boys made expeditions into
St. Corentin, where they wondered at the number of dogs to each
inhabitant and bought cakes and sweets at a pastrycook's and gas-filled
balloons which they sent up in the market-place. Or they would stroll
down to the quays and watch the shipping and practise their French on
sailors looking more like pirates than ordinary sailors.</p>
<p>Once, while Michael was gazing into a shop window at some dusty foreign
stamps in a brass tray, a Capuchin friar spoke to him in very good
English and asked if he collected stamps. Michael said that he did, and
the Capuchin invited him to come back to the convent and see his
collection. Michael thought this was a splendid invitation and willingly
accompanied the Capuchin whom, except for a sore on his lip, he liked
very much. He thought the inside of the convent was rather like the
inside of an aquarium, but he enjoyed the stamps very much. The friar
gave him about a dozen of his duplicates, and Michael promised to write
to him, when he got home, and to send him some of his own. Then they had
tea in the friar's cell, and afterwards Michael set out to walk back to
St. Antoine. It was not yet six o'clock when he reached the house, but
there was a terrible fuss being made about his adventure. Telegrams had
been despatched, the gendarmerie had been informed, and the British
Vice-consul had been interviewed. Mr. Vernon asked in his deepest voice
where the deuce he had been, and when Michael told him he had been
taking tea with a monk, Mr. Vernon was more angry than ever.</p>
<p>"Don't do things like that. Good heavens, boy, you might have been
kidnapped and turned into a Catholic, before you knew where you were.
Hang it all, remember I'm responsible for your safety and never again
get into conversation with a wandering monk."</p>
<p>Michael explained about the stamps, but Mr. Vernon said that was a very
pretty excuse, and would by no means hear of Michael visiting the
convent again. When Michael thought over this fuss, he could not
understand what it had all been about. He could not imagine anything
more harmless than this Capuchin friar with the sore on his lip.
However, he never did see him again, except once in the distance, when
he pointed him out to Mr. Vernon, who said he looked a dirty ruffian.
Michael discovered that grown-up people always saw danger where there
was no danger, but when, as on the occasion when Hands and he plainly
perceived a ghost in the garden, there was every cause for real alarm,
they merely laughed.</p>
<p>The weather grew warmer as August moved on, and Michael with Mr. Vernon
and Mr. Lodge used sometimes to plunge into the depths of the country,
there to construe Ovid and Lucian while the other boys worked at French
with the Frenchman who came in from St. Corentin to teach them. Michael
enjoyed these expeditions with Mr. Vernon and Mr. Lodge. They would sit
down in the lush grass of a shady green lane, close to a pool where the
bull-frogs croaked. Michael would construe the tale of Deucalion and
Pyrrha to Mr. Lodge, while Mr. Vernon lay on his back and smoked a large
pipe. Then a White Admiral butterfly would soar round the oak trees, and
Ovid would be thrown behind them like Deucalion's stones; while Michael
and Mr. Vernon and Mr. Lodge manœuvred and shouted and ran up and
down, until the White Admiral was either safely bottled with the cyanide
of potassium or soared away out of sight. When Ovid was finished for the
day, Mr. Lodge used to light a big pipe and lie on his back, while
Michael construed the Dialogue of Charon to Mr. Vernon. Then an Oak
Eggar moth would fly with tumbling reckless flight beyond the pool,
luring Michael and Mr. Lodge and Mr. Vernon to charge through in
pursuit, not deterred by the vivid green slime of the wayside water as
the ghosts were deterred by gloomy Styx. Indeed, as the hot August days
went by, each one was marked by its butterflies more definitely than by
anything else. Michael thought that France was a much better place for
collecting them than England. Scarce Swallow-tails and Ordinary
Swallow-tails haunted the cliffs majestically. Clouded Yellows were
chased across the fields of clover. Purple Emperors and Camberwell
Beauties and Bath Whites were all as frequent as Heath Browns at home.
Once, they all went a long expedition to Bluebeard's Castle on the other
side of the Loire, and, while they sat in a garden café, drinking their
grenadine sucrée, hundreds of Silver-washed Fritillaries appeared over
the tables. How the fat French bourgeois stared to see these mad English
boys chasing butterflies in their sunny bee-haunted garden. But how
lovely the Fritillaries looked, set upside down to show their powdered
green and rosy wings washed by silver streaks. Perhaps the most exciting
catch of all happened, close to the shutting in of a September dusk, in
the avenue of pollarded acacias. Michael saw the moth first on the
lowest bough of a tree. It was jet-black marked with thick creamy
stripes. Neither he nor Hands had a net, and they trembled with
excitement and chagrin. Michael threw a stone rather ineffectively and
the moth changed its position, showing before it settled down on a
higher branch underwings of glowing vermilion.</p>
<p>"Oh, what can it be?" Michael cried, dancing.</p>
<p>"It's frightfully rare," squeaked Hands.</p>
<p>"You watch it carefully, while I scoot for a net," commanded Michael.</p>
<p>He tore along up the darkening drive, careless of ghosts or travelling
seamen bent on murder and robbery. He rushed into the hall and shouted,
'A terribly rare moth in the drive! Quick, my net!' and rushed back to
the vigilant Hands. The others followed, and after every cunning of the
hunter had been tried, the moth was at last secured and after a search
through Kirby's Butterflies and Moths pronounced to be a Jersey Tiger,
not so rare, after all, in fact very common abroad. But it was a
glorious beast when set, richly black, barred and striped with damasked
cream over a flame of orange-scarlet.</p>
<p>The six weeks were over. Michael had to leave in advance of the others,
in order to enter for his scholarship examination at St. James'. Mr.
Lodge took him to St. Malo and handed him over to the charge of
Rutherford's older brother, who was already at St. James' and would see
Michael safely to London. Michael could scarcely believe that this
Rutherford was a boy, so tall was he, such a heavy black moustache had
he and so pleasant was he to Michael. Michael thought with regret of the
green and golden days in Brittany, as he waved to Mr. Lodge standing on
the St. Malo jetty. He felt, as the steamer sailed across the glassy sea
through a thick September haze, that he was coming back to greater
adventures, that he was older and, as he paced beside Rutherford up and
down the deck, that he was more important. But he thought with regret of
Brittany and squeaky Hands and the warm days of butterflies. He hoped to
return next year and see again the fig tree by his bedroom window and
the level shore of the Loire estuary and the tangled tumble-down garden
on the cliff's edge. He would always think of Mr. Lodge and Mr. Vernon,
those very dearly loved schoolmasters. He would think of the ghostly
Breton lanes at twilight and the glorious Sundays unspoilt by church or
best clothes and of the bull-frogs in the emerald pools.</p>
<p>Michael disliked the examination very much indeed. He hated the way in
which all the other competitors stared. He disliked the speed with which
they wrote and the easy manners of some of them. However, he gained his
scholarship mostly by age marks and was put in the Lower Third, the
youngest boy in the class by two years, and became a Jacobean, turning
every morning round the same gate, walking every morning up the same
gravel path, running every morning up the same wide steps, meeting every
morning the same smell of hot-water pipes and hearing every day the same
shuffle of quick feet along the corridors past the same plaster cast of
the Laocoön.</p>
