<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6: Pax</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Pax</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Lower Fifth only knew Michael during the Autumn term. After Christmas he moved up to the Middle Fifth, and, leaving behind him many friends, including Alan, he found himself in an industrious society concentrated upon obtaining the Oxford and Cambridge Higher Certificate for proficiency in Greek, Latin, Mathematics and either Divinity, French or History. Removed from the temptations of a merry company, Michael worked very hard indeed and kept his brain fit by argument instead of football. The prevailing attitude of himself and his contemporaries towards the present was one of profound pessimism. The scholarship of <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ was deteriorating; there was a dearth of great English poets; novelists were not so good as once they were in the days of Dickens; the new boys were obviously inferior to their prototypes in the past; the weather was growing worse year by year; the country was plunging into an abyss. In school Michael prophesied more loudly than any of his fellow Jeremiahs, and less and less did it seem worth while in these Certificate-stifled days to seek for romance or poetry or heroism or adventure. Yet as soon as the precincts of discipline and study were left behind, Michael could extract from life full draughts of all these virtues.</p>
				<p>Without neglecting the Oxford and Cambridge Higher Certificate he devoured voraciously every scrap of information about Catholicism which it was possible to acquire. Books were bought in tawdry repositories⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Catholic Belief</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Credentials of the Catholic Church</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Garden of the Soul</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Glories of Mary</i> by <abbr>St.</abbr> Alphonso Liguori, Alban Butler’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Saints</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Clifton Tracts</i>, and on his own side of the eternal controversy, Lee’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Validity of English Orders</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Alcuin Club Transactions</i> with many other volumes. Most of all he liked to pore upon the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tourist’s Church Guide</i>, which showed with asterisks and paragraph marks and sections and daggers what churches throughout the United Kingdom possessed the five points of Incense, Lights, Vestments, Mixed Chalice and Eastward Position. He found it absorbing to compare the progress of ritual through the years.</p>
				<p>Michael, as once he had known the ranks of the British Army from Lance-corporal to Field Marshal, could tell the hierarchy from Sexton to Pope. He knew too, as once he knew the history and uniform of Dragoons, Hussars and Lancers, the history and uniform of the religious orders⁠—Benedictines, Cistercians, Franciscans, Dominicans (how he loved the last in their black and white habit, <i xml:lang="la">Domini canes</i>, watchdogs of the Lord), Carmelites, Præmonstratensians, Augustinians, Servites, Gilbertines, Carthusians, Redemptorists, Capuchins, Passionists, Jesuits, Oblates of <abbr>St.</abbr> Charles Borromeo and the Congregation of <abbr>St.</abbr> Philip Neri. Michael outvied <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout in ecclesiastical possessions, and his bedroom was nearly as full as the repository from which it was stocked. There were images of <abbr>St.</abbr> Michael (his own patron), <abbr>St.</abbr> Hugh of Lincoln (patron of schoolboys) and <abbr>St.</abbr> James of Compostella (patron of the school), together with Our Lady of Seven Dolours, Our Lady Star of the Sea and Our Lady of Lourdes, Our Lady of Perpetual Succour, Our Lady of Victories; there were eikons, scapulars, crucifixes, candlesticks, the Holy Child of Prague, rosaries, and indeed every variety of sacred bric-a-brac. Michael slept in an oriental atmosphere, because he had formed the habit of burning during his prayers cone-shaped pastilles in a saucer. The tenuous spiral of perfumed smoke carried up his emotional apostrophes through the prosaic ceiling of the old night-nursery past the stars, beyond the Thrones and Dominations and Seraphim to God. Michael’s contest with the sins of youth had become much more thrilling since he had accepted the existence of a personal fiend, and in an ecstasy of temptation he would lie in bed and defy the Devil, calling upon his patron the Archangel to descend from heaven and battle with the powers of evil in that airy arena above the coal-wharf beyond the railway lines. But the Father of Lies had many tricks with which to circumvent Michael; he would conjure up sensuous images before his antagonist; succubi materialized as pretty housemaids, feminine devils put on tights and openwork stockings to encounter him from the pages of pink weekly papers, and sometimes Satan himself would sit at the foot of his bed in the darkness and tell him tales of how other boys enjoyed themselves, arguing that it was a pity to waste his opportunities and filling his thoughts with dissolute memories. Michael would leap from his bed and pray before his crucifix, and through the darkness angels and saints would rally to his aid, until Satan slunk off with his tail between his legs, personally humiliated.</p>
				<p>At school the fever of the examination made Michael desperate with the best intentions. He almost learned the translations of Thucydides and Sophocles, of Horace and Cicero. He knew by heart a meanly written Roman History, and no passage in Corneille could hold an invincible word. Cricket was never played that summer by the Middle Fifth; it was more useful to wander in corners of the field, murmuring continually the tables of the Kings of Judah from Maclear’s sad-hued abstract of Holy Scripture. In the end Michael passed in Greek and Latin, in French and Divinity and Roman History, even in Algebra and Euclid, but the arithmetical problems of a Stockbroker, a Paperhanger and a Housewife made all the rest of his knowledge of no account, and Michael failed to see beside his name in the school list that printed bubble which would refer him to the tribe of those who had satisfied the examiners for the Oxford and Cambridge Higher Certificate. This failure depressed Michael, not because he felt implicated in any disgrace, but because he wished very earnestly that he had not wasted so many hours of fine weather in work. He made up his mind that the mistake should never be repeated, and for the rest of his time at <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ he resisted all set books. If Demosthenes was held necessary, Michael would read Plato, and when Cicero was set, Michael would feel bound to read Livy.</p>
				<p>Michael looked back on the year with dissatisfaction, and wondered if school was going to become more and more boring each new term for nine more terms. The prospect was unendurably grey, and Michael felt that life was not worth living. He talked over with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner the flatness of existence on the evening after the result of the examination was known.</p>
				<p>“I swotted like anything,” said Michael gloomily. “And what’s the good? I’m sick of everything.”</p>
				<p>The priest’s eyes twinkled, as he plunged deeper into his wicker armchair and puffed clouds of smoke towards the comfortable shelves of books.</p>
				<p>“You want a holiday,” he remarked.</p>
				<p>“A holiday?” echoed Michael fretfully. “What’s the good of a holiday with my mater at some beastly seaside place?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, come,” said the priest, smiling. “You’ll be able to probe the orthodoxy of the neighbouring clergy.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, no really, it’s nothing to laugh at, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner. You’ve no idea how beastly it is to dawdle about in a crowd of people, and then at the end go back to another term of school. I’m sick of everything. Will you lend me Lee’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary of Ecclesiastical Terms</i>?” added Michael in a voice that contained no accent of hope.</p>
				<p>“I’ll lend you anything you like, my dear boy,” said the priest, “on one condition.”</p>
				<p>“What’s that?”</p>
				<p>“Why, that you’ll admit life holds a few grains of consolation.”</p>
				<p>“But it doesn’t,” Michael declared.</p>
				<p>“Wait a bit, I haven’t finished. I was going to say⁠—when I tell you that we are going to keep the Assumption this August.”</p>
				<p>Michael’s eyes glittered for a moment with triumph.</p>
				<p>“By Jove, how decent.” Then they grew dull again. “And I shan’t be here. The rotten thing is, too, that my mater wants to go abroad. Only she says she couldn’t leave me alone. But of course she could really.”</p>
				<p>“Why not stay with a friend⁠—the voluble Chator, for instance, or Martindale, that Solomon of schoolboys, or Rigg who in Medicean days would have been already a cardinal, so admirably does he incline to all parties?”</p>
				<p>“I can’t ask myself,” said Michael. “Their people would think it rum. Besides, Chator’s governor has gout, and I wouldn’t care to be six weeks with the other two. Oh, I do hate not being grown up.”</p>
				<p>“What about your friend Alan Merivale? I thought him a very charming youth and refreshingly unpietistic.”</p>
				<p>“He doesn’t know the difference between a chasuble and a black gown,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>“Which seems to me not to matter very much ultimately,” put in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner.</p>
				<p>“No, of course it doesn’t. But if one is keen on something and somebody else isn’t, it isn’t much fun,” Michael explained. “Besides, he can’t make me out nowadays.”</p>
				<p>“Surely the incomprehensible is one of the chief charms of faith and friendship.”</p>
				<p>“And anyway he’s going abroad to Switzerland⁠—and I couldn’t possibly fish for an invitation. It is rotten. Everything’s always the same.”</p>
				<p>“Except in the Church of England. There you have an almost blatant variety,” suggested the priest.</p>
				<p>“You never will be serious when I want you to be,” grumbled Michael.</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes I will, and to prove it,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner, “I’m going to make a suggestion of unparagoned earnestness.”</p>
				<p>“What?”</p>
				<p>“Now just let me diagnose your mental condition. You are sick of everything⁠—Thucydides, cabbage, cricket, school, schoolfellows, certificates and life.”</p>
				<p>“Well, you needn’t rag me about it,” Michael interrupted.</p>
				<p>“In the Middle Ages gentlemen in your psychical perplexity betook themselves either to the Crusades or entered a monastery. Now, why shouldn’t you for these summer holidays betake yourself to a monastery? I will write to the Lord Abbot, to your lady mother, and if you consent, to the voluble Chator’s lady mother, humbly pointing out and ever praying, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>”</p>
				<p>“You’re not ragging?” asked Michael suspiciously. “Besides, what sort of a monastery?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, an Anglican monastery; but at the same time Benedictines of the most unimpeachable severity. In short, why shouldn’t you and Mark Chator go to Clere Abbas on the Berkshire Downs?”</p>
				<p>“Are they strict?” enquired Michael. “You know, saying the proper offices and all that, not the Day Hours of the English Church⁠—that rotten Anglican thing.”</p>
				<p>“Strict!” cried <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner. “Why, they’re so strict that <abbr>St.</abbr> Benedict himself, were he to abide again on earth, would seriously consider a revision of his rules as interpreted by Dom Cuthbert Manners, <abbr class="initialism">O.S.B.</abbr>, the Lord Abbot of Clere.”</p>
				<p>“It would be awfully ripping to go there,” said Michael enthusiastically.</p>
				<p>“Well then,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner, “it shall be arranged. Meanwhile confer with the voluble and sacerdotal Chator on the subject.”</p>
				<p>The disappointment of the ungranted certificate, the ineffable tedium of endless school, seaside lodgings and all the weighty ills of Michael’s oppressed soul vanished on that wine-gold July noon when Michael and Chator stood untrammelled by anything more than bicycles and luggage upon the platform of the little station that dreamed its trains away at the foot of the Downs.</p>
				<p>“By Jove, we’re just like pilgrims,” said Michael, as his gaze followed the aspiring white road which rippled upward to green summits quivering in the haze of summer. The two boys left their luggage to be fetched later by the Abbey marketing-cart, mounted their bicycles, waved a goodbye to the friendly porter beaming among the red roses of the little station and pressed energetically their obstinate pedals. After about half a mile’s ascent they jumped from their machines and walked slowly upwards until the station and clustering hamlet lay breathless below them like a vision drowned deep in a crystal lake. As they went higher a breeze sighed in the sun-parched grasses, and the lines and curves of the road intoxicated them with naked beauty.</p>
				<p>“I like harebells almost best of any flowers,” said Michael. “Do you?”</p>
				<p>“They’re awfully like bells,” observed Chator.</p>
				<p>“I wouldn’t care if they weren’t,” said Michael. “It’s only in London I want things to be like other things.”</p>
				<p>Chator looked puzzled.</p>
				<p>“I can’t exactly explain what I mean,” Michael went on. “But they make me want to cry just because they aren’t like anything. You won’t understand what I mean if I explain ever so much. Nobody could. But when I see flowers on a lovely road like this, I get sort of frightened whether God won’t grow tired of bothering about human beings. Because really, you know, Chator, there doesn’t seem much good in our being on the earth at all.”</p>
				<p>“I think that’s a heresy,” pronounced Chator. “I don’t know which one, but I’ll ask Dom Cuthbert.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t care if it is heresy. I believe it. Besides, religion must be finding out things for yourself that have been found out already.”</p>
				<p>“Finding out for yourself,” echoed Chator with a look of alarm. “I say, you’re an absolute Protestant.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, no I’m not,” contradicted Michael. “I’m a Catholic.”</p>
				<p>“But you set yourself up above the Church.”</p>
				<p>“When did I?” demanded Michael.</p>
				<p>“Just now.”</p>
				<p>“Because I said that harebells were ripping flowers?”</p>
				<p>“You said a lot more than that,” objected Chator.</p>
				<p>“What did I say?” Michael parried.</p>
				<p>“Well, I can’t exactly remember what you said.”</p>
				<p>“Then what’s the use of saying I’m a Protestant?” cried Michael in triumph. “I think I’ll play footer again next term,” he added inconsequently.</p>
				<p>“I jolly well would,” Chator agreed. “You ought to have played last football term.”</p>
				<p>“Except that I like thinking,” said Michael. “Which is rotten in the middle of a game. It’s jolly decent going to the monastery, isn’t it? I could keep walking on this road forever without getting tired.”</p>
				<p>“We can ride again now,” said Chator.</p>
				<p>“Well, don’t scorch, because we’ll miss all the decent flowers if you do,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>Then silently for awhile they breasted the slighter incline of the summit.</p>
				<p>“Only six weeks of these ripping holidays,” Michael sighed. “And then damned old school again.”</p>
				<p>“Hark!” shouted Chator suddenly. “I hear the Angelus.”</p>
				<p>Both boys dismounted and listened. Somewhere, indeed, a bell was chiming, but a bell of such quality that the sound of it through the summer was like a cuckoo’s song in its unrelation to place. Michael and Chator murmured their salute of the Incarnation, and perhaps for the first time Michael half realized the mysterious condescension of God. Here, high up on these downs, the Word became imaginable, a silence of wind and sunlight.</p>
				<p>“I say, Chator,” Michael began.</p>
				<p>“What?”</p>
				<p>“Would you mind helping me mark this place where we are?”</p>
				<p>“Why?”</p>
				<p>“Look here, you won’t think I’m pretending? but I believe I was converted at that moment.”</p>
				<p>Chator’s well-known look of alarm that always followed one of Michael’s doctrinal or liturgical announcements was more profound than it had ever been before.</p>
				<p>“Converted?” he gasped. “What to?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, not <em>to</em> anything,” said Michael. “Only different from what I was just now, and I want to mark the place.”</p>
				<p>“Do you mean⁠—put up a cross or something?”</p>
				<p>“No, not a cross. Because, when I was converted, I felt a sudden feeling of being frightfully alive. I’d rather put a stone and plant harebells round it. We can dig with our spanners. I like stones. They’re so frightfully old, and I’d like to think, if I was ever a long way from here, of my stone and the harebells looking at it⁠—every year new harebells and the same old stone.”</p>
				<p>“Do you know what I think you are?” enquired Chator solemnly. “I think you’re a mystic.”</p>
				<p>“I never can understand what a mystic was,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>“Nobody can,” said Chator encouragingly. “But lots of them were made saints all the same. I don’t think you ever will be, because you do put forward the most awfully dangerous doctrines. I do think you ought to be careful about that. I do really.”</p>
				<p>Chator was spluttering under the embarrassment of his own eloquence, and Michael, delicately amused, looked at him with a quizzical smile. Chator was older than Michael, and by reason of the apoplectic earnestness of his appearance and manner, and the natural goodness of him so sincerely, if awkwardly expressed, he had a certain influence which Michael admitted to himself, however much in the public eye he might affect to patronize Chator from his own intellectual eminence. Along the road of speculation, however, Michael would not allow Chator’s right to curb him, and he took a wilful pleasure in galloping ahead over the wildest, loftiest paths. To shock old Chator was Michael’s delight; and he never failed to do so.</p>
				<p>“You see,” Chator spluttered, “it’s not so much what you say now; nobody would pay any attention to you, and I know you don’t mean half what you say; but later on you’ll begin to believe in all these heretical ideas of your own. You’ll end up by being an Agnostic. Oh, yes you will,” he raged with torrential prophecies, as Michael leaned over the seat of his bicycle laughing consumedly. “You’ll go on and on wondering this and that and improving the doctrines of the Church until you improve them right away.”</p>
				<p>“You are a funny old ass. You really are,” gurgled Michael. “And what’s so funny to me is that just when I had a moment of really believing you dash in with your warnings and nearly spoil it all. By Jove, did you see that Pale Clouded Yellow?” he shouted suddenly. “By Jove, I haven’t seen one in England for an awful long time. I think I’ll begin collecting butterflies again.”</p>
				<p>Disputes of doctrine were flung to the wind that sang in their ears as they mounted their bicycles and coasted swiftly from the bare green summits of the downs into a deep lane overshadowed by oak-trees. Soon they came to the Abbey gates, or rather to the place where the Abbey gates would one day rise in Gothic commemoration of the slow subscriptions of the faithful. At present the entrance was only marked by a stony road disappearing abruptly at the behest of a painted finger-post into verdurous solitudes. After wheeling their bicycles for about a quarter of a winding mile, the two boys came to a large open space in the wood and beheld Clere Abbey, a long low wooden building set as piously near to the overgrown foundations of old Clere Abbey as was possible.</p>
				<p>“What a rotten shame,” cried Michael, “that they can’t build a decent Abbey. Never mind, I think it’s going to be rather good sport here.”</p>
				<p>They walked up to the door that seemed too massive for the flimsy pile to which it gave entrance, and pealed the large bell that hung by the side. Michael was pleased to observe a grille through which peered the eyes of the monastic porter, inquisitive of the wayfarers. Then a bolt shot back, the door opened, and Michael and Chator entered the religious house.</p>
				<p>“I’m Brother Ambrose,” said the porter, a stubby man with a flat pockmarked face whose ugliness was redeemed by an expression of wonderful innocence. “Dom Cuthbert is expecting you in the Abbot’s Parlour.”</p>
				<p>Michael and Chator followed Brother Ambrose through a pleasant book-lined hall into the paternal haunt where the Lord Abbot of Clere sat writing at a roll-top desk. He rose to greet the boys, who with reverence perceived him to be a tall dark angular man with glowing eyes that seemed very deeply set on either side of his great hooked nose. He could scarcely have been over thirty-five years of age, but he moved with a languid awkwardness that made him seem older. His voice was very remote and melodious as he welcomed them. Michael looked anxiously at Chator to see if he followed any precise ritual of salutation, but Dom Cuthbert solved the problem by shaking hands at once and motioning them to wicker chairs beside the empty hearth.</p>
				<p>“Pleasant ride?” enquired Dom Cuthbert.</p>
				<p>“Awfully decent,” said Michael. “We heard the Angelus a long way off.”</p>
				<p>“A lovely bell,” murmured Dom Cuthbert. “Tubular. It was given to us by the Duke of Birmingham. Come along, I’ll show you the Abbey, if you’re not too tired.”</p>
				<p>“Rather not,” Michael and Chator declared.</p>
				<p>The Abbot led the way into the book-lined hall.</p>
				<p>“This is the library. You can read here as much as you like. The brethren sit here at recreation-time. This is the refectory,” he went on, with distant chimings in his tone.</p>
				<p>The two boys gazed respectfully at the bare trestle table and the raised reading-desk and the picture of <abbr>St.</abbr> Benedict.</p>
				<p>“Of course we haven’t much room yet,” Dom Cuthbert continued. “In fact we have very little. People are very suspicious of monkery.”</p>
				<p>He smiled tolerantly, and his voice faded almost out of the refectory, as if it would soothe the harsh criticism of the world, hence infinitely remote.</p>
				<p>“But one day”⁠—from worldly adventure his voice came back renewed with hope⁠—“one day, when we have some money, we shall build a real Abbey.”</p>
				<p>“This is awfully ripping though, isn’t it?” observed Michael with sympathetic encouragement.</p>
				<p>“I dare say the founder of the Order was never so well housed,” agreed the Abbot.</p>
				<p>Dom Cuthbert led them to the guest-chamber, from which opened three diminutive bedrooms.</p>
				<p>“Your cells,” the monk said. “But of course you’ll feed in here,” he added, indicating the small bare room in which they stood with so wide a sweep of his ample sleeve that the matchboarded ceiling soared into vast Gothic twilights and the walls were of stone. Michael was vaguely reminded of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout and his inadequate oratory.</p>
				<p>“The guest-brother is Dom Gilbert,” continued the Abbot. “Come and see the cloisters.”</p>
				<p>They passed from the guestroom behind the main building and saw that another building formed there the second side of a quadrangle. The other two sides were still open to the hazel coppice that here encroached upon the Abbey. However, there was traceable the foundations of new buildings to complete the quadrangle, and a mass of crimson hollyhocks were shining with rubied chalices in the quiet sunlight. For all its incompleteness, this was a strangely beautiful corner of the green world.</p>
				<p>“Are these the cloisters?” Michael asked.</p>
				<p>“One day, one day,” replied Dom Cuthbert. “A little rough at present, but before I die I’m sure there will be a mighty edifice in this wood to the glory of God and His saints.”</p>
				<p>“I’d like it best that way,” said Michael. “Not all at once.”</p>
				<p>He felt an imaginative companionship with the aspirations of the Abbot.</p>
				<p>“Now we’ll visit the Chapel,” said Dom Cuthbert. “We built the Chapel with our own hands of mud and stone and laths. You’ll like the Chapel. Sometimes I feel quite sorry to think of leaving it for the great Abbey Church we shall one day build with the hands of workmen.”</p>
				<p>The Chapel was reached by a short cloister of primitive construction, and it was the simplest purest place of worship that Michael had ever seen. It seemed to have gathered beneath its small roof the whole of peace. On one side the hazel bushes grew so close that the windows opened on to the mysterious green heart of life. Two curtains worked with golden blazonries divided the quire from the congregation.</p>
				<p>“This is where you’ll sit,” said Dom Cuthbert, pointing to two kneeling-chairs on either side of the opening into the quire. “Perhaps you’ll say a prayer now for the Order. The prayers of children travel very swiftly to God.”</p>
				<p>Dom Cuthbert passed to the Abbot’s stall to kneel, while Michael and Chator knelt on the chairs. When they had prayed for awhile, the Abbot took them into the sacristy and showed them the vestments and the sacred vessels of the altar, and from the sacristy door they passed into a straight woodland way.</p>
				<p>“The Abbot’s walk,” said Dom Cuthbert, with a beautiful smile. “The brethren cut this wonderful path during their hours of recreation. I cannot envy any cloisters with this to walk in. How soft is the moss beneath our feet, and in Spring how loudly the birds sing here. The leaves come very early, too, and linger very late. It is a wonderful path. Now I must go and work. I have a lot of letters to write. Explore the woods and the downs and enjoy yourselves. You’ll find the rules that the guests must observe pinned to the wall of the guestroom. Enjoy yourselves and be content.”</p>
				<p>The tall figure of the monk with its languid awkwardness of gait disappeared from the Abbot’s walk, and the two boys, arm-in-arm, wandered off in the opposite direction.</p>
				<p>“Everything was absolutely correct,” burbled Chator. “Oh, yes, absolutely. Not at all Anglican. Perfectly correct. I’m glad. I’m really very glad. I was a bit afraid at first it might be Anglican. But it’s not⁠—oh, no, not at all.”</p>
				<p>In the guest-chamber they read the rules for guests, and discovered to their mortification that they were not expected to be present at Matins and Lauds.</p>
				<p>“I was looking forward to getting up at two o’clock,” said Michael. “Perhaps Dom Cuthbert will let us sometimes. It’s really much easier to get up at two o’clock than five. Mass is at half-past five, and we must go to that.”</p>
				<p>Dom Gilbert, the guest-brother, came in with plates of bread and cheese while the boys were reading the rules, and they questioned him about going to Matins. He laughed and said they would have as much church as they wished without being quite such strict Benedictines as that. Michael was not sure whether he liked Dom Gilbert⁠—he was such a very practical monk.</p>
				<p>“If you go to Mass and Vespers and Compline every day,” said Dom Gilbert, “you’ll do very well. And please be punctual for your meals.”</p>
				<p>Michael and Chator looked injured.</p>
				<p>“Breakfast after Mass. Bread and cheese at twelve. Cup of tea at five, if you’re in. Supper at eight.”</p>
				<p>Dom Gilbert left them abruptly to eat their bread and cheese alone.</p>
				<p>“He’s rather a surly chap,” grumbled Michael. “He doesn’t seem to me the right one to have chosen for guest-brother at all. I had a lot I wanted to ask him. For one thing I don’t know where the <abbr>lav.</abbr> is. I think he’s a rotten guest-brother.”</p>
				<p>The afternoon passed in a walk along the wide ridge of the downs through the amber of this fine summer day. Several hares were seen and a kestrel, while Chator disposed very volubly of the claims of several Anglican clergymen to Catholicism. After tea in the hour of recreation they met the other monks, Dom Gregory the organist, Brother George and Brother William. It was not a very large monastery.</p>
				<p>Chator found the Vespers somewhat trying to his curiosity, because owing to the interposition of the curtain he was unable to criticize the behaviour of the monks in quire. This made him very fidgety, and rather destroyed Michael’s sense of peace. However, Chator restrained his ritualistic ardour very well at Compline, which in the dimness of the starlit night was a magical experience, as one by one with raised cowls the monks entered in black procession and silence absolute. Michael, where he knelt in the ante-chapel, was profoundly moved by the intimate responses and the severe Compline hymn. He liked, too, the swift departure to bed without chattering good nights to spoil the solemnity of the last Office. Even Chator kept all conversation for the morning, and Michael felt he had never lain down upon a couch so truly sanctified, nor ever risen from one so pure as when Dom Gilbert knocked with a hammer on the door and, standing dark against the milk-white dawn, murmured “<i xml:lang="la">Pax vobiscum.</i>”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
