<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 15</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part"><section id="chapter-2-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3><a id="Chapter_XV_Grey_Eyes" name="Chapter_XV_Grey_Eyes"></a>Chapter XV: Grey Eyes</h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">A</span>S Michael sat opposite to his mother in the railway-carriage on the
following morning, he found it hard indeed to realize that an ocean did
not stretch between them. He did not feel ashamed; he had no tremors for
the straightforward regard; he had no uneasy sensation that possibly
even now his mother was perplexing herself on account of his action. He
simply felt that he had suffered a profound change and that his action
of yesterday called for a readjustment of his entire standpoint. Or
rather, he felt that having since yesterday travelled so far and lived
so violently, he could now only meet his mother as a friend from whom
one has been long parted and whose mental progress during many years
must be gradually apprehended.</p>
<p>"Why do you look at me with such a puzzled expression, Michael?" asked
Mrs. Fane. "Is my hat crooked?"</p>
<p>Michael assured her that nothing was the matter with her hat.</p>
<p>"Do you want to ask me something?" persisted Mrs. Fane.</p>
<p>Michael shook his head and smiled, wondering whether he did really wish
to ask her a question, whether he would be relieved to know what
attitude she would adopt towards his adventure. With so stirring a word
did he enhance what otherwise would have seemed base. His mother
evidently was aware of a tension in this ridiculously circumscribed
railway-carriage. Would it be released if he were to inform her frankly
of what had happened, or would such, an admission be an indiscretion
from which their relationship would never recover? After all she was his
mother, and there must positively exist in her inmost self the power of
understanding what he had done. Some part of the impulse which had
actuated his behaviour would surely find a root in the heart of the
handsome woman who travelled with such becoming repose on the seat
opposite to him. He forgot to bother about himself in this sudden new
pleasure of observation that seemed to endow him with undreamed-of
opportunities of distraction and, what was more important, with a stable
sense of his own individuality. How young his mother looked! Until now
he had taken her youth for granted, but she must be nearly forty. It was
scarcely credible that this tall slim creature with the proud, upcurving
mouth and lustrous grey eyes was his own mother. He thought of his
friends' homes that were presided over by dumpy women in black silk with
greying hair. Even Alan's mother, astonishingly pretty though she was,
seemed in the picture he conjured of her to look faded beside his own.</p>
<p>And while he was pondering his mother's beauty, the train reached the
station at which they must alight for Basingstead. There was Alan in
white flannels on the platform, there too was Mrs. Ross; and as she
greeted his mother Michael's thoughts went back to the day he saw these
two come together at Carlington Road, and by their gracious encounter
drive away the shadow of Nurse.</p>
<p>"I vote we walk," said Alan. "Mrs. Fane and Aunt Maud can drive in the
pony-chaise, and then your luggage can all come up at once in the cart."</p>
<p>So it was arranged, and as Michael watched his mother and Mrs. Ross
drive off, he was strangely reminded of a picture that he had once
dearly loved, a picture by Flaxman of Hera and Athene driving down from
Olympus to help the Greeks. <span title="Leukôlenos Hêrê">Λευκὡλενος Ἡρη</span>—that was his mother, and <span title="glaukôpis 'AThênê">γλαυκὡπις Ἁθἡνη</span>—that
was Mrs. Ross. He could actually remember the line in the
Iliad that told of the gates of heaven, where the Hours keep watch,
opening for the goddesses' descent—<span title="automatai de pulai mukon ouranoi as echon Ôrai">αὑτὑμαται δἑ πὑλαι μὑκοον
οὑρανοι ἁς ἑχον Ὡραι</span>. At
the same time for all his high quotations, Michael could not help
smiling at the dolefully senescent dun pony being compared to the golden
steeds of Hera or at the pleasant old porter who hastened to throw open
the white gate of the station-drive serving as a substitute for the
Hours.</p>
<p>The country air was still sweet between the hazel hedgerows, although
the grass was drouthy and the scabious blooms were already grey with
dust. Nothing for Michael could have been more charged with immemorial
perfume than this long walk at July's end. It held the very quintessence
of holiday airs through all the marching years of boyhood. It was
haunted by the memory of all the glad anticipations of six weeks'
freedom that time after time had succeeded the turmoil of breaking up
for the August holidays. The yellow amoret swinging from the tallest
shoot of the hedge was the companion of how many summer walks. The acrid
smell of nettles by the roadside was prophetic of how many pastoral
days. The butterflies, brown and white and tortoiseshell, that danced
away to right and left over the green bushes, to what winding paths did
they not summon. And surely Alan gave a final grace to this first walk
of the holidays. Surely he crystallized all hopes, all memories, all
delights of the past in a perfection of present joy.</p>
<p>Yet Michael, as he walked beside him, could only think of Alan as a
beautiful inanimate object for whom perception did not exist. Inanimate,
however, was scarcely the word to describe one who was so very
definitely alive: Michael racked his invention to discover a suitable
label for Alan, but he could not find the word. With a shock of
misgiving he asked himself whether he had outgrown their friendship, and
partly to test, but chiefly to allay his dread, he took Alan's arm with
a gesture of almost fierce possession. He was relieved to find that
Alan's touch was still primed with consolation, that companionship with
him still soothed the turbulence of his own spirit reaching out to grasp
what could never be expressed in words, and therefore could never be
grasped. Michael was seized with a longing to urge Alan to grow up more
quickly, to make haste lest he should be left behind by his adventurous
friend. Michael remembered how he used to dread being moved up, hating
to leave Alan in a class below him, how he had deliberately dallied to
allow Alan to overtake him. But idleness in school-work was not the same
as idleness in experience of life, and unless Alan would quickly grow
up, he knew that he must soon leave him irremediably behind. It was
distressing to reflect that Alan would be shocked by the confidence
which he longed to impose upon him, and it was disquieting to realize
that these last summer holidays of school, however complete with the
quiet contentment of familiar pleasures, would for himself grow slowly
irksome with deferred excitement.</p>
<p>But as the green miles slowly unfolded themselves, as the dauntless
yellow amoret still swung from a lissome stem, as Alan spoke of the
river and the grey tower on the hill, Michael saw the fretful colours of
the Exhibition grow dim; and when dreaming in the haze of the slumberous
afternoon they perceived the village and heard the mysterious murmur of
human tranquillity, Michael's heart overflowed with gratitude for the
sight of Alan by his side. Then the church-clock that struck a timeless
hour sounded for him one of those moments whose significance would
resist eternally whatever lying experience should endeavour to assail
the truth which had made of one flashing scene a revelation.</p>
<p>Michael was ineffably refreshed by his vision of the imperishable
substance of human friendship, and he could not but jeer at himself now
for having a little while back put Alan into the domain of objects
inanimate.</p>
<p>"There's your cottage," said Alan. "It's practically next door to Cobble
Place. Rather decent, eh?"</p>
<p>Michael could not say how decent he thought it, nor how decent he
thought Alan.</p>
<p>"I vote we go up the river after tea," he suggested.</p>
<p>"Rather," said Alan. "I expect you'll come round to tea with us. Don't
be long unpacking."</p>
<p>"I shan't, you bet," said Michael.</p>
<p>Nor was he, and after a few minutes he and his mother were sitting in
the drawing-room at Cobble Place, eating a tea that must have been very
nearly the same as an unforgettable tea of nine years ago. Mrs. Carthew
did not seem quite so old; nor indeed did anybody, and as for Joan and
May Carthew, they were still girls. Yet even when he and Alan had stayed
down here for the wedding only four years ago, Michael had always been
conscious of everybody's age. And now he was curiously aware of
everybody's youth. He supposed vaguely that all this change of outlook
was due to his own remarkable precocity and rapid advance; but
nevertheless he still ate with all the heartiness of childhood.</p>
<p>After tea Mrs. Ross with much tact took up Michael by himself to see her
son and, spared the necessity of comment, Michael solemnly regarded the
fair-haired boy of two who was squeaking an india-rubber horse for his
mother's benefit.</p>
<p>"O you attractive son of mine," Mrs. Ross sighed in a whisper.</p>
<p>"He's an awfully sporting kid," Michael said.</p>
<p>Then he suddenly remembered that he had not seen Mrs. Ross since her
husband was killed. Yet from this chintz-hung room whose casements were
flooded with the amber of the westering sun, how far off seemed fatal
Africa. He remembered also that to this very same gay room he had long
ago gone with Miss Carthew after tea, that here in a ribboned bed he had
first heard the news of her coming to live at 64 Carlington Road.</p>
<p>"We must have a long talk together soon," said Mrs. Ross, seeming to
divine his thoughts. "But I expect you're anxious to revive old memories
and visit old haunts with Alan. I'm going to stay here and talk to
Kenneth while Nurse has her tea."</p>
<p>Michael lingered for a moment in the doorway to watch the two. Then he
said abruptly, breathlessly:</p>
<p>"Mrs. Ross, I think painters and sculptors are lucky fellows. I'd like
to paint you now. I wish one could understand the way people look, when
one's young. But I'm just beginning to realize how lucky I was when you
came to us. And yet I used to be ashamed of having a governess. Still, I
believe I did appreciate you, even when I was eight."</p>
<p>Then he fled, and to cover his retreat sang out loudly for Alan all the
way downstairs.</p>
<p>"I say, Aunt Enid wants to talk to you," said Alan.</p>
<p>"Aunt Enid?" Michael echoed.</p>
<p>"Mrs. Carthew," Alan explained.</p>
<p>"I vote we go for a walk afterwards, don't you?" Michael suggested.</p>
<p>"Rather," said Alan. "I'll shout for you, when I think you've jawed long
enough."</p>
<p>Michael found Mrs. Carthew in her sun-coloured garden, cutting down the
withering lupins whose silky seed-pods were strewn all about the paths.</p>
<p>"Can you spare ten minutes for an old friend?" asked Mrs. Carthew.</p>
<p>Michael thought how tremendously wise she looked, and lest he should be
held to be staring unduly, he bent down to sweep together the
shimmering seed-pods, while Mrs. Carthew snipped away, talking in
sentences that matched the quick snickasnack of her weapon.</p>
<p>"I must say you've grown up into an attractive youth. Let me see, you
must be seventeen and a half. I suppose you think yourself a man now?
Dear me, these lupins should have been cut back a fortnight ago. And now
I have destroyed a hollyhock. Tut-tut, I'm getting very blind. What did
you think of Maud's son? A healthy rosy child, and not at all amenable
to discipline, I'm glad to say. Well, are you enjoying school?"</p>
<p>The old lady paused with her scissors gaping, and looked shrewdly at
Michael.</p>
<p>"I'm getting rather fed up with it," Michael admitted. "It goes on for
such a long time. It wasn't so bad this term, though."</p>
<p>Then he remembered that whatever pleasures had mitigated the
exasperation of school last term were decidedly unscholastic, and he
blushed.</p>
<p>"I simply loathed it for a time," he added.</p>
<p>"Alan informs me he acquired his first eleven cap this term and will be
in the first fifteen as Lord Treasurer or something," Mrs. Carthew went
on. "Naturally he must enjoy this shower of honours. Alan is decidedly
typical of the better class of unthinking young Englishman. He is
pleasant to look at—a little colt-like perhaps, but that will soon wear
off. My own dear boy was very like him, and Maud's dear husband was much
the same. You, I'm afraid, think too much, Michael."</p>
<p>"Oh, no, I don't think very much," said Michael, disclaiming philosophy,
and greatly afraid that Mrs. Carthew was supposing him a prig.</p>
<p>"You needn't be ashamed of thinking," she said. "After all, the amount
you think now won't seriously disorganize the world. But you seem to me
old for your age, much older than Alan for instance, and though your
conversation with me at any rate is not mature, nevertheless you convey
somehow an impression of maturity that I cannot quite account for."</p>
<p>Michael could not understand why, when for the first time he was
confronted with somebody who gave his precocity its due, he was unable
to discuss it eagerly and voluminously, why he should half resent being
considered older than Alan.</p>
<p>"Don't look so cross with me," Mrs. Carthew commanded. "I am an old
woman, and I have a perfect right to say what I please to you. Besides,
you and I have had many conversations, and I take a great interest in
you. What are you going to be?"</p>
<p>"Well, that's what I can't find out," said Michael desperately. "I know
what I'm not going to be, and that's all."</p>
<p>"That's a good deal, I think," said Mrs. Carthew. "Pray tell me what
professions you have condemned."</p>
<p>"I'm not going into the Army. I'm not going into the Civil Service. I'm
not going to be a doctor or a lawyer."</p>
<p>"Or a parson?" asked Mrs. Carthew, crunching through so many lupin
stalks at once that they fell with a rattle on to the path.</p>
<p>"Well, I have thought about being a parson," Michael slowly granted.
"But I don't think parsons ought to marry."</p>
<p>"Good gracious," exclaimed Mrs. Carthew, "you're surely not engaged?"</p>
<p>"Oh, no," said Michael; but he felt extremely flattered by the
imputation. "Still, I might want to be."</p>
<p>"Then you're in love," decided Mrs. Carthew. "No wonder you look so
careworn. I suppose she's nearly thirty and has promised to wait until
you come of age. I can picture her. If I had my stick with me I could
draw her on the gravel. A melon stuck on a bell-glass, I'll be bound."</p>
<p>"I'm not in love, and if I were in love," said Michael with dignity, "I
certainly shouldn't be in love with anyone like that. But I could be in
love at any moment, and so I don't think I shall be a parson."</p>
<p>"You've got plenty of time," said Mrs, Carthew. "Alan says you're going
to Oxford next year."</p>
<p>Michael's heart leapt—next year had never before seemed so imminent.</p>
<p>"I suppose you'll say that I'm an ignorant and foolish old woman, if I
attempt to give you advice about Oxford; but I gave you advice once
about school, and I'll do the same again. To begin with, I think you'll
find having been to St. James' a handicap. I have an old friend, the
wife of a don, who assures me that many of the boys who go up from your
school suffer at Oxford from their selfish incubation by Dr. Brownjohn.
They're fit for killing too soon. In fact, they have been forced."</p>
<p>"Ah, but I saw that for myself," said Michael. "I had a row with
Brownjohn about my future."</p>
<p>"How delighted I am to hear that!" said Mrs. Carthew. "I think that I'll
cut back the delphiniums also. Then you're not going in for a
scholarship?"</p>
<p>"No," said Michael. "I don't want to be hampered, and I think my
mother's got plenty of money. But Alan's going to get a scholarship."</p>
<p>"Yes, that is unfortunately necessary," said Mrs. Carthew. "Still, Alan
is sufficiently typical of the public-school spirit—an odious
expression yet always unavoidable—to carry off the burden. If you were
poor, I should advise you to buy overcoats. Three smart overcoats are an
equipment for a poor man. But I needn't dwell on social ruses in your
case. Remember that going to Oxford is like going to school. Be normal
and inconspicuous at first; and when you have established yourself as
an utterly undistinguished young creature, you can career into whatever
absurdities of thought, action or attire you will. In your first year
establish your sanity; in your second year display your charm; and in
your third year do whatever you like. Now there is Alan calling, and
we'll leave the paths strewn with these cut stalks as a Memento Mori to
the gardener. What a charming woman your mother is. She has that
exquisite vagueness which when allied with good breeding is perfectly
irresistible, at any rate to a practical and worldly old woman like me.
But then I've had an immense amount of time in which to tidy up.
Pleasant hours to you down here. It's delightful to hear about the place
the sound of boys laughing and shouting."</p>
<p>Michael left Mrs. Carthew, rather undecided as to what exactly she
thought of him or Alan or anybody else. As he walked over the lawn that
went sloping down to the stream, he experienced a revulsion from the
interest he took in listening to what people thought about him, and he
now began to feel an almost morbid sensitiveness to the opinion of
others. This destroyed some of the peace which he had sought and
cherished down here in the country. He began to wonder if that wise old
lady had been laughing at him, whether all she said had been an implied
criticism of his attitude towards existence. Her praise must have been
grave irony; her endorsement of his behaviour had been disguised
reproof. She really admired Alan, and had only been trying as gently as
possible to make him come into line with her nephew. He himself must
seem to her eccentric, undignified, a flamboyant sort of creature whom
she pitied and whose errors she wished to remedy. Michael was mortified
by his retrospect of the conversation, and felt inclined when he saw
Alan to make an excuse and retire from his society, until his
self-esteem had recovered from the rebuke that had lately been
inflicted. Indeed, it called for a great effort on Michael's part to
embark in the canoe with his paragon and sit face to face without
betraying the wound that was damaging his own sense of personality.</p>
<p>"You had a very long jaw with Aunt Enid," said Alan. "I thought you were
never coming. She polished me off in about three minutes."</p>
<p>Michael looked darkly at Alan for a moment before he asked with
ungracious accentuation what on earth Alan and Mrs. Carthew had talked
about.</p>
<p>"She was rather down on me," said Alan. "I think she must have thought I
was putting on side about getting my Eleven."</p>
<p>Michael was greatly relieved to hear this, and his brow cleared as he
enquired what was wrong.</p>
<p>"Well, I can't remember her exact words," Alan went on. "But she said I
must be careful not to grow up into a strong silent Englishman, because
their day was done. She practically told me I was rather an ass, and
pretended to be fearfully surprized when she heard I was going to try
for a scholarship at Oxford. She was squashing slugs all the time she
was talking, and I could do nothing but look a bigger fool than ever and
count the slugs. I ventured to remark once that most people thought it
was a good thing to be keen on games, and she said half the world was
composed of fools which accounted for the preponderation—I mean
preponderance—of pink on the map. She said it always looked like an
advertizement of successful fox-hunting. And when I carefully pointed
out that I'd never all my life had a chance to hunt, she said 'More's
the pity,' I couldn't make out what she was driving at; so, feeling
rather a worm, I shot off as soon as I could. What did she say to you?"</p>
<p>"Oh, nothing much," said Michael triumphantly. "She's a rum old girl,
but rather decent."</p>
<p>"She's too clever for me," said Alan, shaking his head. "It's like
batting to a pro."</p>
<p>Then from the complexities of feminine judgment, the conversation glided
easily like the canoe towards a discussion of the umpire's decision last
term in giving Alan out l.b.w. to a ball that pitched at least two feet
away from the off stump.</p>
<p>"It was rotten," said Alan fervidly.</p>
<p>"It was putrid," Michael agreed.</p>
<p>To avoid the difficulty of a first night in a strange cottage, Mrs. Fane
and Michael had supper at Cobble Place; and after a jolly evening spent
in looking for pencils to play games that nobody could ever recollect in
all their rich perfection of potential incidents, Michael and Mrs. Fane
walked with leisurely paces back to Woodbine Cottage through a
sweet-savoured moonless night.</p>
<p>Michael enjoyed the intimate good night beneath so small a roof, and
wished that Stella were with them. He lay awake, reading from each in
turn of the tower of books he had erected by his bedside to fortify
himself against sleeplessness. It was a queer enough mixture—Swinburne,
Keats, Matthew Arnold, Robinson Crusoe, Half-hours with the Mystics, Tom
Brown's Schooldays, Daudet's Sappho, the second volume of The Savoy, The
Green Carnation, Holy Living and Dying; and as each time he changed his
mind and took another volume, on the gabled ceiling the monstrous shadow
that was himself filled him with a dreadful uncertainty. After an hour
or so, he went to sit by the low window, leaning out and seeming to hear
the dark world revolve in its course. Stars shook themselves clear from
great rustling trees, and were in time enmeshed by others. The waning
moon came up behind a rounded hill. A breeze fluttered down the dusty
road, and was silent.</p>
<p>Michael fell to wondering whether he could ever bring himself in tune
with these slow progressions of nature, whether he could renounce after
one haggard spell of experience the mazy stir of transitory emotions
that danced always beyond this dream. An Half-hour with St. John of the
Cross made him ask himself whether this were the dark night of the soul
through which he was passing. But he had never travelled yet, nor was he
travelling now. He was simply sitting quiescent, allowing himself to be
passed. These calm and stately figures of humanity whom he admired in
their seclusion had only reached it after long strife. Mrs. Carthew had
lost a husband and a son, had seen her daughter leave her house as a
governess. Joan and May had for many years sunk their hopes in tending
their mother. Nancy was away earning money, and would be entitled to
retire here one day. Mrs. Ross had endured himself and Stella for
several years, had married and lost her husband, and had borne a child.
All these had won their timeless repose and their serene uncloying ease.
They were not fossils, but perdurable images of stone. And his mother,
she was—he stopped his reverie. Of his mother he knew nothing. Outside
the dust stirred in the road fretfully; a malaise was in the night air.
Michael shivered and went back to bed, and as he turned to blow out his
candle he saw above him huge and menacing his own shadow. A cock crowed.</p>
<p>"Silly ass," muttered Michael, "he thinks it's already morning," and
turning over after a dreamless sleep he found it was morning. So he rose
and dressed himself serenely for a long sunburnt day.</p>
<p>On his way up the road to call for Alan he met the postman, who in
answer to his enquiries handed him a letter from South Africa stamped
all over with mysterious official abbreviations. He took it up to his
mother curiously.</p>
<p>At lunch he asked her about the news from the war.</p>
<p>"Yes, dear, I had a letter," she murmured.</p>
<p>"From Lord Saxby, I suppose?"</p>
<p>"Yes, dear."</p>
<p>"Anything interesting?" Michael persisted.</p>
<p>"Oh, no, it's only about marches and not being able to wash properly."</p>
<p>"I thought it might be interesting," Michael speculated.</p>
<p>"No, dear. It wouldn't interest you," said Mrs. Fane in her tone of
gentle discouragement.</p>
<p>"I don't want to be inquisitive," said Michael resentfully.</p>
<p>"No, dear, I'm sure you don't," his mother softly agreed.</p>
<p>The holidays ran their pastoral course of sun and rain, of clouds and
winds, until the last week arrived with September in her most majestic
mood of flawless halcyon. These were days that more than any hitherto
enhanced for Michael the reverence he felt for the household of Cobble
Place. These were days when Mrs. Carthew stepped wisely along her
flowery enclosure, pondering the plums and peaches on the warm walls
that in a transcendency of mellow sunlight almost took on the texture of
living sunburnt flesh. These were days when Joan and May Carthew went
down the village street with great bunches of Michaelmas daisies, of
phloxes and Japanese anemones, or sat beneath the mulberry tree, sewing
in the bee-drowsed air.</p>
<p>At the foot of the hill beyond the stream was a straggling wind-frayed
apple-orchard, fresh pasturage for lambs in spring, and now in September
a jolly haunt for the young son of Mrs. Ross. Here one afternoon, when
Alan was away at Basingstead Major playing the last cricket match of the
year, Michael plunged down in the grass beside her.</p>
<p>They sat for a while in silence, and Mrs. Ross seemed to Michael to be
waiting for him to speak first, as if by her own attitude of mute
expectation she could lure him on to express himself more openly than by
direct question and shy answer. He felt the air pregnant with
confidences, and kept urging himself on to begin the statement and
revelation of his character, sure that whatever he desired to ask must
be asked now while he was perhaps for the last time liable to this grave
woman's influence, conscious of the security of goodness, envious of the
maternity of peace. This grey-eyed woman seemed to sit above him like a
proud eagle, careless of homage, never to be caught, never to be tamed,
a figure for worship and inspiration. Michael wondered why all the women
who awed him had grey eyes. Blue eyes fired his senses, striking sparks
and kindling answering flames from his own blue eyes. Brown eyes left
him indifferent. But grey eyes absorbed his very being, whether they
were lustrous and violet-shaded like his mother's and Stella's, or
whether, like Mrs. Ross's, they were soft as grey sea-water that in a
moment could change to the iron-bound rocks they were so near.</p>
<p>Still Michael did not speak, but watched Mrs. Ross solemnly hand back to
the rosy child sitting beside her in the grass the fallen apples that he
would always fling from him exuberantly, panting the while at laughter's
highest pitch.</p>
<p>"I wonder if I ever laughed like that," said Michael.</p>
<p>"You were a very serious little boy, when I first knew you," Mrs. Ross
told him.</p>
<p>"I must have been rather depressing," Michael sighed.</p>
<p>"No, indeed you were not, dear Michael," she answered. "You had much too
much personality."</p>
<p>"Have I now?" Michael asked sharply.</p>
<p>"Yes, of course you have."</p>
<p>"Well, what gives it to me?"</p>
<p>"Surely personality is something that is born with one. Personality
can't be made," said Mrs. Ross.</p>
<p>"You don't think experience has got anything to do with it?" Michael
pressed.</p>
<p>"I think experience makes the setting, and according to the experience
the personality is perfected or debased, but nothing can destroy
personality, not even death," she murmured, far away for a moment from
this orchard.</p>
<p>"Which would you say had the stronger personality—Alan or I?" asked
Michael.</p>
<p>"I should say you had," said Mrs. Ross. "Or at any rate you have a
personality that will affect a larger number of people, either
favourably or unfavourably."</p>
<p>"But Alan influences me more than I influence him," Michael argued.</p>
<p>"That may be," Mrs. Ross admitted. "Though I think your influence over
Alan is very strong in this way. I think Alan is always very eager to
see you at your best, and probably as your friendship goes on he will be
more solicitous for you than for himself. I should say that he would be
likely to sink himself in you. I wonder if you realize what a
passionately loyal soul he is."</p>
<p>Michael flushed with pleasure at this appreciation of his friend, and
his ambition went flying over to Basingstead Major to inspire Alan to
bat his best. Then he burst forth in praise of him; he spoke of his
changelessness, his freedom from moods, his candour and toleration and
modesty.</p>
<p>"But the terrible thing is," said Michael suddenly, "that I always feel
that without noticing it I shall one day leave Alan behind."</p>
<p>"But when you turn back, you'll find him just the same, don't forget;
and you may be glad that he did not come with you. You may be glad that
from his slowness you can find an indication of the road that I'm sure
you yourself will one day try to take. Alan will travel by it all his
life. You'll travel by it ultimately. Alan will never really appreciate
its beauty. You will. That will be your recompense for what you suffer
before you find it."</p>
<p>Mrs. Ross, as if to conceal emotion, turned quickly to romp with her
son. Then she looked at Michael:</p>
<p>"And haven't you already once or twice left Alan behind?"</p>
<p>Suddenly to Michael her grey eyes seemed accusing.</p>
<p>"Yes, I suppose I have," he granted. "But isn't that the reason why my
personality affects more people than his? You said just now that
experience was only the setting, but I'm sure in my case it's more than
a mere setting."</p>
<p>And even as he spoke all his experience seemed to cloud his brow,
knitting and lining it with perplexed wrinkles.</p>
<p>"Mrs. Ross, you won't think me very rude if I say you always remind me
of Pallas Athene? You always have, you know. At first it was just a
vague outward resemblance, because you're tall and sort of cool-looking,
and I really think your nose is rather Greek, if you don't mind my
saying so."</p>
<p>"Oh, Michael," Mrs. Ross smiled. "I think you're even more unalterable
than Alan. I seem to see you as a little boy again, when you talk like
that."</p>
<p>Michael, however, was too keen on the scent of his comparison to be put
off by smiles, and he went on eagerly:</p>
<p>"Now I realize that you actually are like Athene. You're one of those
people who seem to have sprung into the world fully armed. I can't
imagine that you were ever young."</p>
<p>Mrs. Ross laughed outright at this.</p>
<p>"Wait a minute," cried Michael. "Or ever old for that matter. And you
know all about me. No, you needn't shake your head like that. Because
you do."</p>
<p>Young Kenneth was so much roused by Michael's triumphant asseverations
that he began to shout and kick in delighted tune and fling the apples
from him with a vigour that he had never yet reached.</p>
<p>"You know," Michael continued breathlessly, while the boy on the grass
gurgled his endorsement of every word. "You know that I'm old for my
age, that I've already done things that other chaps at school only
whisper about."</p>
<p>He stopped suddenly, for the grey eyes had become like rocks, and though
the baby still panted ecstatically, there fell a chill.</p>
<p>"I'm very sorry to hear it," said Mrs. Ross.</p>
<p>"Well, why did you lead me on to confide in you?" said Michael sullenly.
"I thought you would sympathize."</p>
<p>"Michael, I apologize," she said, melting. "I didn't mean to hurt your
feelings. I dare say—ah, Michael, you see how easily all my shining
armour falls to pieces."</p>
<p>"Another broken bottle," Michael muttered.</p>
<p>He got up abruptly and, though there were tears in his eyes, she could
not win him back.</p>
<p>"Dear old boy, do tell me. Don't make the mistake of going back into
yourself, because I failed you for a moment."</p>
<p>Mrs. Ross held out her hand, but Michael walked away.</p>
<p>"You don't understand," he turned to say. "You couldn't understand. And
I don't want you to be able to understand. You mustn't think I'm
sulking, or being rude, and really I'd rather you didn't understand.
That boy of yours won't ever want you to understand. I don't think he'll
ever do anything that isn't perfectly comprehensible."</p>
<p>"Michael," said Mrs. Ross, "don't be so bitter. You'll be sorry soon."</p>
<p>"Soon?" asked Michael fiercely. "Soon? Why soon? What's going to happen
to make me sorry soon? Something is going to happen. I know. I feel it."</p>
<p>He fled through the wind-frayed orchard up the hill-side. With his back
against the tower called Grogg's Folly he looked over four counties and
vowed he would go heedless of everything that stood between him and
experience. He would deny himself nothing; he would prove to the hilt
everything.</p>
<p>"I must know," he wrung out of himself. "Everything that has happened
must have happened for some reason. I will believe that. I can't believe
in God, until I can believe in myself. And how can I believe in myself
yet?"</p>
<p>The four counties under September's munificence mocked him with their
calm.</p>
<p>"I know that all these people at Cobble Place are all right," he
groaned. "I know that, just as I know Virgil is a great poet. But I
never knew Virgil was great until I read Swinburne. Oh, I want to be
calm and splendid and proud of myself, but I want to understand life
while I'm alive. I want to believe in immortality, but in case I never
can be convinced of it, I want to be convinced of something. Everything
seems to be tumbling down nowadays. What's so absurd is that nobody can
understand anybody else, let alone the universe. Mrs. Ross can
understand why I like Alan, but she can't understand why I want love.
Viner can understand why I get depressed, but he can't understand why I
can't be cured immediately. Wilmot could understand why I wanted to read
his rotten books, but he can't understand why the South African War
upset me. And so on with everybody. I'm determined to understand
everybody," Michael vowed, "even if I can't have faith," he sighed to
the four counties.</p>
		</section></section>
	</body>
</html>
