<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 12</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part"><section id="chapter-3-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">
	<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>
	<span epub:type="subtitle">202 High</span>
</h2>

<p>The large room at 202 High Street which Michael shared with Grainger and
Lonsdale was perhaps in the annals of university lodgings the most
famous. According to tradition, the house was originally part of the
palace of a cardinal. Whether it had been the habitation of
ecclesiastical greatness or not, it had certainly harbored grandeur of
some kind; to this testified the two fireplaces surmounted by
coats-of-arms in carved oak that enhanced this five-windowed room with a
dignity which no other undergraduate lodging could claim. The house at
this period was kept by a retired college cook, who produced for dinner
parties wonderful old silver which all his tenants believed to have been
stolen from the kitchen of his college. The large room of 202 High gave
the house its character, but there were many other rooms besides.
Wedderburn, for instance had on the third story a sitting-room whose
white paneling and Georgian grace had been occupied by generations of
the transitory exquisites of art and fashion. Downstairs in the aqueous
twilight created by a back garden was the dining-room which the four of
them possessed in common. As for the other lodgers, none were St. Mary's
men, and their existence was only alluded to by Michael and his friends
when the ex-cook charged them for these strangers' entertainments.</p>

<p>Michael was the first to arrive at Two Hundred and Two, and he
immediately set to work to arrange in the way that pleased him best the
decorative and personal adjuncts contributed by Grainger, Lonsdale, and
himself. For his own library he found a fine set of cupboards which he
completely filled. The books of Grainger and Lonsdale he banished to the
dining-room, where their scant numbers competed for space on the shelves
with jars of marmalade, egg-cups, and toast-racks. The inconvenience of
the confusion was helpfully obviated first by the fact that their
collection, or rather their accumulation, was nearly throughout in
duplicate owing to the similar literary tastes and intellectual travaux
forcés of Grainger and Lonsdale, and secondly by the fact that for a
year to neither taste nor intellect was there frequent resort. With
their pictures Michael found the same difficulty of duplication, but as
there were two fireplaces he took an ingenious delight in supporting
each fireplace with similar pictures, so that Thorburn's grouse, Cecil
Aldin's brilliant billiard-rooms, Sir Galahad and Eton Society were to
be found at either end. Elsewhere on the spacious walls he hung his own
Blakes and Frederick Walkers, and the engraving of the morning stars
singing together he feathered with the photographic souvenirs of
Lonsdale's fagdom. As for the pictures that belonged to the ex-cook,
mostly very large photogravures of Marcus Stone such as one sees in the
corridors of theaters, these he took upstairs and with them covered
Wedderburn's white-paneled walls after he had removed the carefully hung
Dürers to the bathroom. This transference wasted a good deal of time,
but gave him enough amusement when Wedderburn arrived to justify the
operation. The pictures all disposed, he called for a carpenter to hang
Grainger's triumphal oars and Lonsdale's hunting trophies of masks, pads
and brushes, and surveyed with considerable satisfaction the
accumulative effect of the great room now characterized by their joint
possessions. Michael was admiring his work when Lonsdale arrived and
greeted him boisterously.</p>

<p>"Hullo! I say, are we all straight? How topping! But wait a bit. I've
got something that's going to put the jolly old lid on this jolly old
room. What's the name of the joker who keeps these digs? Macpherson?"</p>

<p>He shouted from the landing to the ex-cook.</p>

<p>"I say, send up the packing-case that's waiting for me downstairs."</p>

<p>Michael inquired what was inside.</p>

<p>"Wait a bit, my son," said the beaming owner. "I've got something in
there that's going to make old Wedders absolutely green. I've thought
this out. I told my governor I was going into digs with some of the
æsthetic push and didn't want to be cut out, so he's lent me this."</p>

<p>"What on earth is it?" Michael asked on a note of ambiguous welcome.</p>

<p>The packing-case shaped like a coffin had been set down on the floor by
the ex-cook and his slave. Lonsdale was wrenching off the top.</p>

<p>"I had a choice between a mummy and a what d'ye call it, and I chose the
what d'ye call it," said Lonsdale.</p>

<p>He had torn the last piece of the cover away, and lying in straw was
revealed the complete armor of a Samurai.</p>

<p>"Rum-looking beggar. Worth twenty of those rotten statues of
Wedderburn's. It was a present to the governor from somebody in the
East, but as I promised not to go to dances in it, he lent it to me.
Rather sporting of him, what? Where shall we put him?"</p>

<p>"I vote we hide it till this evening," suggested Michael, "and then put
it in Wedder's bed. He'll think he's in the wrong room."</p>

<p>"Ripping!" cried Lonsdale. "In pyjamas, what?"</p>

<p>That Japanese warrior never occupied the æsthetic niche that Lord
Cleveden from his son's proposal may have thought he would occupy.
Otherwise he played an important part in the life of Two Hundred and
Two. Never did any visitor come to stay for the week-end, but Sammy, as
he was soon called, was set to warm his bed. To Lonsdale, returning home
mildly drunk from Trinity Clareter or Phoenix Wine, he was always ready
to serve as a courteous listener of his rambling account of an evening's
adventures. He was borrowed by other digs to annoy the landladies: he
went for drives in motor cars to puzzle country inns. Lonsdale tried to
make him into a college mascot, and he drove in state to the St. Mary's
grind on the box seat of the coach. He was put down on the pavement
outside the lodge with a plate for pennies and a label "Blind" round his
neck. But Sammy's end was a sad one. He had been sent to call on the
Warden, and was last seen leaning in a despondent attitude against the
Warden's gothic door. Whether the butler broke him up when Sammy fell
forward onto his toes, or whether he was imprisoned eternally in a coal
cellar, no one knew. Lord Cleveden was informed he had been stolen.</p>

<p>If Michael had tried hard to find two people in whose company it would
be more difficult to work than with any other pair in the university, he
could scarcely have chosen better than Lonsdale and Grainger. Neither of
them was reading an Honor School, and the groups called H2 or C3 or X26,
that with each term's climax they were compelled to pass in order to
acquire the degree of bachelor of arts, produced about a week before
their ordeal a state of irritable industry, but otherwise were unheeded.
Michael was not sorry to let his own reading beyond the irreducible
minimum slide during this gay third year. He promised himself a fourth
year, when he would withdraw from this side of Oxford life and in some
cloistered digs work really hard. Meanwhile, he enjoyed 202 High as the
quintessence of youth's amenity.</p>

<p>Some of the most enduring impressions of Oxford were made now, though
they were not perhaps impressions that marked any development in himself
by intellectual achievements or spiritual crises. In fact, at the time
the impressions seemed fleeting enough; and it was only when the third
year was over, when Two Hundred and Two was dismantled of every vestige
of this transient occupation that Michael in summoning these impressions
from the past recaptured, often from merely pictorial recollections, as
much of Oxford as was necessary to tell him how much Oxford had meant.</p>

<p>There were misty twilights in November when Lonsdale came back spattered
with mud after a day with the Bicester or the V.W.H. At such an hour
Michael, who had probably been sitting alone by the roaring fire, was
always ready to fling away his book, and, while Lonsdale grunted and
labored to pull off his riding-boots to hear the tale of a great run
across a great piece of country.</p>

<p>There was the autumn afternoon when Grainger stroked St. Mary's to
victory in the Coxwainless Fours. Another oar was hung in Two Hundred
and Two, and a bonfire was made in Cuther's quad to celebrate the
occasion. Afterward Grainger himself triumphantly drunk between Michael
and Lonsdale was slowly persuaded along the High and put to bed, while
Wedderburn prescribed in his deepest voice a dozen remedies.</p>

<p>There were jovial dinner parties when rowing men from Univ and New
College sat gigantically round the table and ate gigantically and
laughed gigantically, and were taken upstairs to Wedderburn's dim-lit
room to admire his statues of Apollo, his old embroideries and his Dürer
woodcuts. These giants in their baggy blanket trousers, their
brass-buttoned coats and Leander ties nearly as pink as their own
faces, made Wedderburn's white Apollos look almost mincing and the
embroideries rather insipid. There were other dinner parties even more
jovial when the Palace of Delights, otherwise 202 High, entertained the
Hotel de Luxe, otherwise 230 High, the abode of Cuffe, Sterns, and
Sinclair, or the Chamber of Horrors, otherwise 61 Longwall, where
Maurice and Castleton lived. After dinner the guests and the hosts would
march arm in arm down to college and be just in time to make a
tremendous noise in Venner's, after which they would visit some of the
second-year men, and with bridge to wind up the evening would march arm
in arm up the High and home again.</p>

<p>In the Lent term there were windy afternoons with the St. Mary's
beagles, when after a long run Lonsdale and Michael would lose the
college drag and hire a dogcart in which they would come spanking back
to Oxford with the March gale dying in their wake and the dusk gathering
fast. In the same term there was a hockey cup-match, when St. Mary's was
drawn to play an unfamiliar college on the enemy's ground. 202 High
wondered how on earth such an out-of-the-way ground could possibly be
reached, and the end of it was that a coach was ordered in which a dozen
people drove the mile or so to the field of play, with Lonsdale blowing
the horn all the way down High Street and Cornmarket Street and the
Woodstock Road.</p>

<p>Michael during the year at Two Hundred and Two scarcely saw anybody who
was not in the heart of the main athletic vortex of the university. In
one way, his third year was a retrogression, for he was nearer to the
life of his first year than to his second. The Oxford Looking-Glass had
created for him a society representing various interests. This was now
broken up, partly by the death of the paper, partly by the more highly
intensified existence of the founders. Maurice certainly remained the
same and was already talking of starting another paper. But Wedderburn
was beginning to think of a degree and was looking forward to entering
his father's office and becoming in another year a prosperous partner in
a prosperous firm. Guy Hazlewood had gone down and was away in
Macedonia, trying to fulfill a Balliol precept to mix yourself up in the
affairs of other nations or your own as much as possible. Townsend and
Mowbray thought now of nothing but of being elected President of the
Union, and as Michael was not a member and hated politics he scarcely
saw them. Nigel Stewart had gone to Ely Theological College. The Oxford
Looking-Glass was shattered into many pieces. Alan, however, Michael saw
more often than last year, because Alan was very popular at Two Hundred
and Two.</p>

<p>Michael more and more began to assume the opinions and the attitude of
his companions. He began more and more rigidly to apply their somewhat
naïve standards in his judgment of the world. He was as intolerant and
contemptuous as his friends of any breach of what he almost stated to
himself as the public-school tradition. Oxford was divided into Bad Men
and Good Eggs. The Bad Men went up to London and womanized&mdash;some even of
the worst womanized in Oxford: they dressed in a style that either by
its dowdiness or its smartness stamped them: they wore college colors
round their straw hats and for their ties: they were quiet,
surreptitious, diligent, or blatantly rowdy in small sections, and at
least half the colleges in the Varsity contained nothing but Bad Men.
The Good Eggs went up to London and got drunk; and if they womanized no
one must know anything about it. Drink was the only vice that should be
enjoyed communely; in fact, if it were enjoyed secretly, it transformed
the victim into the very worst of Bad Men. The Good Eggs never made a
mistake in dress: they only wore old school colors or Varsity club
colors: they were bonhomous, hearty, careless, and rowdy in large
groups. Only the men from about eight colleges were presumed to be Good
Eggs: the rest of the Varsity had to demonstrate its goodness.</p>

<p>Michael sometimes had misgivings about this narrowly selected paucity of
Good Eggs. He never doubted that those chosen were deservedly chosen,
but he did sometimes speculate whether in the masses of the Bad Men
there might not be a few Good Eggs unrecognized as Eggs, unhonored for
their Goodness. Yet whenever he made an excursion into the midst of the
Bad Men, he was always bound to admit the refreshment of his very firm
prejudice in favor of the Good Eggs. What was so astonishing about Good
Eggery was the members' obvious equipment for citizenship of the world
as opposed to the provincialism of Bad Mannery. Unquestionably it was
possible to meet the most intelligent, the most widely read Bad Men; but
intellect and culture were swamped by their barbarous self-proclamation.
They suffered from an even bitterer snobbishness than the Good Eggs. In
the latter case, the snobbishness was largely an inherited pride: with
the Bad Men it was obviously an acquired vanity. Where, however, Michael
found himself at odds with Good Eggery was in the admission to titular
respect of the Christ Church blood. This growing toleration was being
conspicuously exemplified in the attitude of St. Mary's, that most
securely woven and most intimate nest of Good Eggery.</p>

<p>When Michael had first come up there had been an inclination at his
college to regard with as much contemptuous indifference an election to
the Bullingdon as an election to the Union. It was tacitly understood at
St. Mary's that nothing was necessary to enhance the glory of being a
St. Mary's man. Gradually, however, the preponderance of Etonian
influence outweighed the conventional self-sufficiency of the
Wykehamists, and several men in Michael's year joined the Bullingdon,
one of the earliest of these destroyers of tradition being Lonsdale. The
result of this action was very definitely a disproportion in the
individual expenditure of members of the college. St. Mary's had always
been a college for relatively rich men, but in accordance with the
spirit of the college to form itself into an aristocratic republic, it
had for long been considered bad form to spend more than was enough to
sustain each member of this republic on an equality with his fellows.</p>

<p>Now Lonsdale was so obviously a Good Egg that it did not matter when he
played with equal zest roulette and polo or hunted three times a week or
wore clothes of the last extreme of fashion. But Michael and Grainger
were not sure they cared very much for all of Lonsdale's friends from
the House. Certainly they were Etonians and members of the Bullingdon,
but so many of their names were curiously familiar from the hoardings of
advertisements that neither Michael nor Grainger could altogether
believe in their assumption of the privilege of exclusion on the ground
of inherited names.</p>

<p>"I think these Bullingdon bloods are rather rotters," protested Michael,
after an irritating evening of vacuous wealth.</p>

<p>"I <i>must</i> ask them in sometimes," apologized Lonsdale.</p>

<p>"Why?" rumbled Wedderburn, and on his note of interrogation the
Bullingdon bloods were impaled to swing unannaled.</p>

<p>"I don't think all this sort of thing is very good for the college,"
debated Grainger. "It's all very well for you, Lonny, but some of the
second-year men behave rather stupidly. Personally I hate roulette at
St. Mary's. As for some of the would-be fresher bloods, they're like a
lot of damned cavalry subalterns."</p>

<p>"You can't expect the college to be handed over entirely to the rowing
push," said Lonsdale.</p>

<p>"That's better than turning Venner's into Tattersall's," said
Wedderburn.</p>

<p>The effect of enlarging the inclusiveness of Good Eggery was certainly
to breed a suspicion that it was largely a matter of externals; and
therefore among the St. Mary's men who disliked the application of money
as a social standard an inclination grew up to suppose that Good Eggery
might be enlarged on the other side. The feeling of the college, that
elusive and indefinable aroma of opinion, declared itself unmistakably
in this direction, and many Bad Men became Good Eggs.</p>

<p>"We're all growing older," said Michael to Wedderburn in explanation of
the subtle change manifesting itself. "And I suppose a little wiser.
Castleton will be elected President of the J.C.R. at the end of this
year. Not Tommy Grainger, although he'll be President of the O.U.B.C.,
not Sterne, although he'll be in the Varsity Eleven. Castleton will be
elected because he never has believed and he never will believe in mere
externals."</p>

<p>Nevertheless for all of his third year, with whatever fleeting doubts he
had about the progress of St. Mary's along the lines laid down by the
Good Eggery of earlier generations, Michael remained a very devoted
adherent of the principle. He was able to perceive something more than
mere externals in the Best Eggery. This was not merely created by money
or correct habiliment or athletic virtuosity. This existed inherently in
a large number of contemporary undergraduates. Through this they
achieved the right to call themselves the Best. It was less an assertion
of snobbishness than of faith. Good Eggery had really become a religion.
It was not inconsistent with Christianity: indeed, it probably derived
itself from Christianity through many mailclad and muscular
intercedents. Yet it shrank from anything definitely spiritual as it
would have shrunk from the Salvation Army. Men who intended to be
parsons were of course exceptions, but parsons were regarded as a facet
of the existing social order rather than as trustees for the heirs of
universal truth. Social service was encouraged by fashion, so long as it
meant no more than the supporting of the College Mission in the slums of
Bristol by occasional week-ends. Members of the college would play
billiards in the club for dockhands under or over seventeen, would
subscribe a guinea a year, and as a great concession would attend the
annual report in the J.C.R. There must, however, be no more extravagance
in religion and social service than there should be in dress. The
priestly caste of Good Eggery was represented not by the parsons, but by
the schoolmasters and certain dons. The schoolmasters were the most
powerful, and tried to sustain the legend common to all priestly castes
that they themselves made the religion rather than that they were mere
servants of an idea. Mature Good Eggs affected to laugh at the
schoolmasters whose leading-strings they had severed, but an instinctive
fear endured, so that in time to come Good Egglets would be handed over
for the craft to mold as they had molded their fathers. It could
scarcely be denied that schoolmasters like priests were disinclined to
face facts: it was indubitable that they lived an essentially artificial
life: it was certain that they fostered a clod-headed bigotry, that they
were tempted to regard themselves as philanthropists, that they feared
dreadfully the intrusion of secular influence. It could scarcely be
denied that the Schoolmasterdom of England was a priestcraft as powerful
and arrogant as any which had ever been. But they were gentlemen, that
is to say they shaved oftener than Neapolitan priests; they took a cold
bath in the morning, which probably Calvin's ministers never did; they
were far more politely restrained than the Bacchantes and not less
chaste than the Vestal Virgins. These clean and honest, if generally
rather stupid gentlemen, were the wielders of that afflatus, the
public-school spirit, and so far as Michael could see at present, Good
Eggs were more safe morally with that inspiration than they might have
been with any other. And if a touch of mysticism were needed, it might
be supplied by Freemasonry at the Apollo Lodge; while the Boy Scouts
were beginning to show how admirably this public-school spirit could
blow through the most unpromising material of the middle classes.</p>

<p>Michael so much enjoyed the consciousness of merit which is the supreme
inducement offered by all successful religions, and more than any by
Good Eggery, that he made up his mind quite finally that Good Eggery
would carry him through his existence, however much it were complicated
by the problem of Bad Mannery. During that year at Two Hundred and Two
he grew more and more deeply convinced that to challenge any moral
postulate of Good Eggery was merely contumacious self-esteem. One of the
great principles of Good Eggery was that the Good Egg must only esteem
himself as a valuable unit in Good Eggery. His self-esteem was entitled
to rise in proportion with the distance he could run or kick or throw or
hit.</p>

<p>Analyzed sharply, Michael admitted that Good Eggery rested on very frail
foundations, and it was really surprising with what enthusiasm it
managed to sustain the Good Eggs themselves, so that apparently without
either spiritual exaltation or despair, without disinterested politics
or patriotism, without any deep humanity even, the Good Eggs were still
so very obviously good. Certainly the suicide of Prescott made Michael
wonder how much that rather ignominious surrender by such a Good Egg
might have been avoided with something profounder than Good Eggery at
the back of life's experience. But suicide was an accident, Michael
decided, and could not be used in the arguments against the fundamental
soundness of Good Eggery as the finest social nourishment in these days
of a bourgeoning century.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, at St. Mary's the Good Eggs flourished, and time went by with
unexampled swiftness. In the last days of the Lent term, after St.
Mary's had been defeated by Christ Church in the final of the
Association Cup, Michael, Grainger and Lonsdale determined to drown woe
by a triple Twenty-firster. Every contemporary Good Egg in St. Mary's
and several from other colleges were invited. Forty Good Eggs, groomed
and polished and starched, sat down at the Clarendon to celebrate this
triple majority. Upon that banquet age did not lay one hesitant touch.
The attainment of discretion was celebrated in what might almost have
been hailed as a debauch of youthfulness. Forty Good Eggs drank
forty-eight bottles of Perrier Jouet '93. They drank indeed the last
four dozen gages of that superb summer stored in the J.C.R., the last
four dozen lachrymatories of the 1893 sun, nor could it be said that
vintage of Champagne had funeral games unworthy of its foam and fire.
Forty Good Eggs went swinging out of the Clarendon about half-past nine
o'clock, making almost more noise than even the Corn had ever heard.
Forty Good Eggs went swinging along toward Carfax, swinging and singing,
temporarily deified by the last four dozen of Perrier Jouet '93. Riotous
feats were performed all down the High. Two trams were unhorsed. Hansoms
were raced. Bells were rung. Forty Good Eggs, gloriously, ravishingly
drunk, surged into the lodge. There was just time to see old Venner. In
the quiet office was pandemonium. Good Eggs were dancing hornpipes; Good
Eggs were steadying themselves with cognac; Good Eggs were gently
herded out of the little office as ten o'clock chimed. "Bonner! Bonner!"
the forty Good Eggs shouted, and off they went not to St. Cuthbert's,
but actually to the great lawn in front of New Quad. Third-year men when
they did come into college roaring drunk took no half-measures of
celebration. Excited freshmen and second-year men came swarming out of
Cloisters, out of Parsons' Quad, out of Cuther's to support these wild
seniors. What a bonfire it was! Thirty-one chairs, three tables, two
doors, twelve lavatory seats, every bundle of faggots in college and
George Appleby's bed. Somebody had brought Roman candles. O exquisite
blue and emerald stars! Somebody else had brought Chinese crackers as
big as red chimneys. O sublime din! Lonsdale was on the roof of
Cloisters trying to kill a gargoyle with hurtling syphons. Michael was
tossing up all by himself to decide whether he should tell the Senior
Tutor or the Warden what he really thought of him. A fat welterweight, a
straggler from New College, had been shorn of his coat-tails, and was
plunging about like an overgrown Eton boy. With crimson faces and
ruffled hair and scorched shirt-fronts the guests of the Twenty-firster
acclaimed to-night as the finest tribute ever paid to years of
discretion.</p>

<p>Next morning the three hosts paid ten guineas each to the Dean.</p>

<p>"I thought you people were supposed to have come of age," he said
sardonically.</p>

<p>So incomparably slight was the hang-over from Perrier Jouet '93 that
Grainger, Lonsdale, and Michael smiled very cheerfully, produced their
check books, and would, if Mr. Ambrose had not been so discouraging,
have been really chatty.</p>

<p>After Collections of Lent term, that opportunity accepted by the college
authorities to be offensive in bulk, Michael felt his historical
studies were scarcely betraying such an impulse toward research as might
have been expected of him at this stage. Mr. Harbottle, the History
tutor, an abrupt and pleasant man with the appearance of a cat and the
manners of a dog, yapped vituperations from where he sat with all the
other dons in judgment along the High Table in Hall.</p>

<p>The Warden turned on his orbit and shone full-faced upon Michael.</p>

<p>"A little more work, Mr. Fane, will encourage us all. Your Collection
papers have evidently planted a doubt in Mr. Harbottle's mind."</p>

<p>"He never does a stroke of honest work, Warden," yapped the History
tutor. "If he stays up ten years he'll never get a Fourth."</p>

<p>"In spite of Mr. Harbottle's discouraging prophecy, we must continue to
hope, Mr. Fane, that you will obtain at least a Second next term."</p>

<p>"Next term!" Michael gasped. "But I was expecting to take Schools next
year."</p>

<p>"I'm afraid," said the Warden, "that according to Mr. Ambrose the fabric
of the college will scarcely survive another year of your residence. I
believe I echo your views, Mr. Ambrose?"</p>

<p>The Dean blinked his gray eye and finally said that possibly Mr. Fane
would change next term, adding that a more immediately serious matter
was a deficit of no less than seven chapels. Michael pointed out that he
designed in his fourth year to go as it were into industrious solitude
far away from St. Mary's.</p>

<p>"Are you suggesting Iffley?" inquired the Warden.</p>

<p>"Oh, no, not so far as that; but right away," said Michael. "Somewhere
near Keble. Miles away."</p>

<p>"But we have to consider next term," the Warden urged. "Next term, I
take it, you will still be occupied with the fashionable distractions of
High Street?"</p>

<p>"I'll make an offer," barked Mr. Harbottle. "If he likes to do another
Collection paper at the beginning of next term, and does it
satisfactorily, I will withdraw my opposition, and as far as I'm
concerned he can take his Schools next year."</p>

<p>"What luck?" asked everybody in the lodge when Michael had emerged from
the ordeal.</p>

<p>"I had rather a hot time," said Michael. "Still Harbottle behaved like a
gentleman on the whole."</p>

<p>Maurice arrived in the lodge soon after Michael, and conveyed the
impression that he had left the tutorial forces of the college reeling
under the effect of his witty cannonade. Then Michael went off to
interview the Dean in order to adjust the difficulty which had been
created by the arrears of his early rising. With much generosity he
admitted the whole seven abstentions, and was willing not merely to stay
up a week to correct the deficit, but suggested that he should spend all
the Easter vacation working in Oxford.</p>

<p>So it fell out that Michael managed to secure his fourth year, and in
the tranquillity of that Easter vacation it seemed to him that he began
to love Oxford for the first time with a truly intense passion and that
a little learning was the least tribute he could offer in esteem. It was
strange how suddenly history became charged with magic. Perhaps the
Academic Muse sometimes offered this inspiration, if one spent hours
alone with her. Michael was sad when the summer term arrived in its
course. So many Good Eggs would be going down for ever after this term,
and upon Two Hundred and Two High brooded the shadow of dissolution.
Alan again hovered on the edge of the Varsity Eleven, but a freshman who
bowled rather better the same sort of ball came up, and it seemed
improbable he would get his Blue. However, the disappointment was
evidently not so hard for Alan to bear nowadays. He was indeed becoming
gravely interested in philosophy, and Michael was forced to admit that
he seemed to be acquiring most unexpectedly a real intellectual grasp of
life. So much the better for their companionship next year in those
rooms in St. Giles' which Michael had already chosen.</p>

<p>The summer term was going by fast. It was becoming an experience almost
too fugitive to be borne, this last summer term at Two Hundred and Two.
Michael, Grainger, and Lonsdale had scarcely known how to endure some
offensive second-year men from Oriel being shown their room for next
year. They resented the thought of these Oriel men leaning out of the
window and throwing cushions at their friends and turning to the left to
keep a chapel at Oriel, instead of scudding down to St. Mary's on the
right. Wedderburn was always the one who voiced sentimentally the
unexpressed regrets of the other three. He it was who spoke of the grime
and labor of the paternal office, of Life with a capital letter as large
as any lady novelist's, and of how one would remember these evenings and
the leaning-out over a cushioned window-sill and the poring upon this
majestic street.</p>

<p>"We don't realize our good luck until it's too late really," said
Wedderburn seriously. "We've wasted our time, and now we've got to go."</p>

<p>"Well, dash it all, Wedders," said Lonsdale, "don't talk as if we were
going to bolt for a train before hall. We aren't going down for three
weeks yet, and jolly old Michael and jolly old Tommy aren't going down
for another year."</p>

<p>"Lucky devils!" sighed Wedderburn. "By gad, if I only had my time at the
Varsity all over again."</p>

<p>But just when Wedderburn had by his solemnity almost managed really to
impress the company with a sense of fleeting time, and when even upon
Lonsdale was descending the melancholy of the deep-dyed afternoon,
across the road they could see sauntering three men whom they all knew
well.</p>

<p>"Tally-ho-ho-ho-whooop!" shouted Lonsdale.</p>

<p>The three men saluted thus came upstairs to the big room of Two Hundred
and Two, and a bout of amiable ragging and rotting passed away the hour
before dinner and restored to the big room itself the wonted air of
imperishable good-fellowship.</p>

<p>"Lucky you lads turned up," said Lonsdale. "Old Wedders has been moping
in his window-seat like a half-plucked pigeon. We're dining in hall
to-night, are you?"</p>

<p>The newcomers were dining in hall, and so in a wide line of brilliant
ties and ribbons the seven of them strolled down to college.</p>

<p>There were very few people in hall that night, and Venner's was
pleasantly empty. Venner himself was full of anecdotes, and as they sat
on the table in the middle of the room, drinking their coffee, it seemed
impossible enough to imagine that they would not be forever here
drinking their coffee on a fine June evening.</p>

<p>"Going down soon, Venner," said Wedderburn, who was determined to make
somebody sad.</p>

<p>"What a pity you're not taking a fourth year!" said Venner. "You ought
to have read an Honor School. I always advise the men to read for
honors. The dons like it, you know."</p>

<p>"Got to go and earn my living, Venner," said Wedderburn.</p>

<p>"That's right," said Venner cheerfully. "Then you'll be married all the
sooner, or perhaps you're not a marrying man."</p>

<p>"Haven't found the right girl yet, Venner," said Wedderburn.</p>

<p>"Oh, there's plenty of time," chuckled Venner. "You don't want to be
thinking about girls up here. Some of our men go getting engaged before
they've gone down, and it always messes them up in the Schools."</p>

<p>Maurice Avery came in while Venner was speaking. He seemed restless and
worried, and as Venner went on his restlessness increased.</p>

<p>"But very few of our men have got into trouble here with girls. We had
one man once who married a widow. He was dreadfully chaffed about it,
and couldn't stand it any longer. The men never let him alone."</p>

<p>"Married a widow, while he was still up?" people asked incredulously.</p>

<p>"Why, yes," said Venner. "And actually brought her down for Eights and
introduced her to the Warden on the barge. She was a most severe-looking
woman, and old enough to be his mother. There was some trouble once at
202 High&mdash;that's where you are, isn't it?" He turned to Lonsdale. "But
there won't be any more trouble because Macpherson vowed he wouldn't
have a servant-girl in the house again."</p>

<p>"I suppose that's why we have that perspiring boy," grumbled Wedderburn.
"But what happened, Venner?"</p>

<p>"Well, the usual thing, of course. There were five of our men living
there that year, and she picked out the quietest one of the lot and said
it was him. He had to pay fifty pounds, and when he'd paid it all, the
other four came up to him one by one and offered to pay half."</p>

<p>Everybody laughed, and Maurice suddenly announced that he was in a devil
of a fix with a girl.</p>

<p>"A girl at a village near here," he explained. "There's no question of
her having a baby or anything like that, you know; but her brother
followed me home one night, and yesterday her father turned up. I got
Castleton to talk to him. But it was damned awkward. He and old
Castleton were arguing like hell in our digs."</p>

<p>Maurice stopped and, lighting a cigarette, looked round him as if
expectant of the laughter which had hailed Venner's story. Nobody seemed
to have any comment to make, and Michael felt himself blushing violently
for his friend.</p>

<p>"Bit chilly in here to-night, Venner," said Lonsdale.</p>

<p>"You are a confounded lot of prigs!" said Maurice angrily, and he walked
out of Venner's just as Castleton came in.</p>

<p>"My dear old Frank Castleton," said Lonsdale immediately, "I love you
very much and I think your hair is beautifully brushed, but you really
must talk to our Mr. Avery very, very seriously. He mustn't be allowed
to make such a bee-luddy fool of himself by talking like a third-rate
actor."</p>

<p>"What do you mean?" asked Castleton gruffly.</p>

<p>Lonsdale explained what Maurice had done, and Castleton looked
surprised, but he would not take part in the condemnation.</p>

<p>"You're all friends of his in here," he pointed out. "He probably
thought it was a funny story." There was just so much emphasis on the
pronoun as made the critics realize that Castleton himself was really
more annoyed than he had superficially appeared.</p>

<p>An awkwardness had arisen through the inculpation of Maurice, and
everybody found they had work to do that evening. Quickly Venner's was
emptied.</p>

<p>Michael, turning out of Cloisters to stroll for a while on the lawns of
New Quad before he gave himself to the generalizations of whatever
historian he had chosen to beguile this summer night, came up to
Maurice leaning over the parapet by the Cher.</p>

<p>"Hullo, are you going to condescend to speak to me after the brick I
dropped in Venner's?" asked Maurice bitterly.</p>

<p>"I wish you wouldn't be so theatrically sarcastic," complained Michael,
who was half-unconsciously pursuing the simile which lately Lonsdale had
found for Maurice's behavior.</p>

<p>"Well, why on earth," Maurice broke out, "it should be funny when Venner
tells a story about some old St. Mary's man and yet be"&mdash;he paused,
evidently too vain, thought Michael a little cruelly, to stigmatize
himself&mdash;"and yet be considered contrary to what is <i>done</i> when I tell a
story about myself, I don't quite know, I must admit."</p>

<p>"It was the introduction of the personal element which made everybody
feel uncomfortable," said Michael. "Venner's tale had acquired the
impersonality of a legend."</p>

<p>"Oh, god, Michael, you do talk rot sometimes!" said Maurice fretfully.
"It's nothing on earth but offensive and very youthful priggishness."</p>

<p>"I wonder if I sounded like you," said Michael, "when I talked rather
like you at about seventeen."</p>

<p>Maurice spluttered with rage at this, and Michael saw it would be
useless to remonstrate with him reasonably. He blamed himself for being
so intolerant and for not having with kindlier tact tried to point out
why he had made a mistake; and yet with all his self-reproach he could
not rid himself of what was something very near to active dislike of
Maurice at that moment.</p>

<p>But Maurice went on, unperceiving.</p>

<p>"I hate this silly pretense up here&mdash;and particularly at St.
Mary's&mdash;that nobody ever looks at a woman. It's nothing but infernal
hypocrisy. Upon my soul, I'm glad I'm going down this term. I really
couldn't have stood another year, playing with the fringe of existence.
It seems to me, Michael, if you're sincere in this attitude of yours,
you'll have a very dismal waking up from your dream. As for all the
others, I don't count them. I'm sick of this schoolboy cant. Castleton's
worth everybody else in this college put together. He was wonderful with
that hulking fellow who came banging at the door of our digs. I wonder
what you'd have done, if you'd been digging with me."</p>

<p>"Probably just what Castleton did," said Michael coldly. "You evidently
weren't at home. Now I must go and work. So long."</p>

<p>He left Maurice abruptly, angry with him, angry with himself. What could
have induced Maurice to make such a fool of himself in Venner's? Why
hadn't he been able to perceive the difference of his confession from
Venner's legendary narration which, unfettered by the reality of present
emotions, had been taken under the protection of the comic spirit? The
scene in retrospect appeared improbable, just as improbable in one way,
just as shockingly improbable as the arrival of an angry rustic father
at some Varsity digs in Longwall. And why had he made the recollection
worse for himself by letting Maurice enlarge upon his indignation? It
had been bad enough before, but that petulant outbreak had turned an
accidental vulgarity into vulgarity itself most cruelly vocal. Back in
Two Hundred and Two, Michael heard the comments upon Maurice, and as
Grainger and Lonsdale delivered their judgment, he felt they had all
this time tolerated the offender merely for a certain capacity he
possessed for entertainment. They spoke of him now, as one might speak
of a disgraced servant.</p>

<p>"Oh, let Maurice drop," said Michael wearily. "It was one of those
miserable aberrations from tact which can happen to anybody. I've done
the same sort of thing myself. It's an involuntary spasm of
bad-manners, like sneezing over a crowded railway-carriage."</p>

<p>"Well, I suppose one must make allowances," said Grainger. "These
artistic devils are always liable to breaks."</p>

<p>"That's right," said Michael. "Hoist the Union Jack. It's an
extraordinary thing, the calm way in which an Englishman is always ready
to make art responsible for everything."</p>

<p>Next day Maurice overtook Michael on the way to a lecture.</p>

<p>"I say," he began impetuously, "I made an awful fool of myself yesterday
evening. What shall I do?"</p>

<p>"Nothing," said Michael.</p>

<p>"I was really horribly worried, you know, and I think I rather jumped at
the opportunity to get the beastly business off my chest, as a sort of
joke."</p>

<p>"Come and dine at the Palace of Delights this evening," Michael invited.
"And tell Frank Castleton to come."</p>

<p>"We can't afford to be critical during the last fortnight of jolly old
Two Hundred and Two," said Michael to Lonsdale and Grainger, when they
received rather gloomily at first the news of the invitation.</p>

<p>Maurice in the course of the evening managed to reinstate himself. He so
very divertingly drew old Wedders on the subject of going down.</p>

<p>The last week of the summer term arrived, and really it was very
depressing that so many Good Eggs were irrevocably going to be lost to
the St. Mary's J.C.R.</p>

<p>"I think my terminal dinner this term will have to be the same as my
first one," said Michael. "Only twice as large."</p>

<p>So they all came, Cuffe and Sterne and Sinclair and a dozen more. And
just because so many of the guests were going down, not a word was said
about it. The old amiable ragging and rotting went on as if the college
jokes of to-night would serve for another lustrum yet, as if Two Hundred
and Two would merely be empty of these familiar faces for the short
space of a vacation. Not a pipe was gone from its rack; not a picture
was as yet deposed; not a hint was given of change, either by the
material objects of the big room or by the merry and intimate community
that now thronged it. Then the college tenor was called upon for a song,
and perhaps without any intention of melancholy he sang O Moon of My
Delight. Scarcely was it possible even for these Good Eggs, so rigidly
conscious of each other's rigidity, not to think sentimentally for a
moment how well the turning down of that empty glass applied to them.
The new mood that descended upon the company expressed itself in
reminiscence; and then, as if the sadness must for decency's sake be
driven out, the college jester was called upon for the comic song whose
hebdomadal recurrence through nine terms had always provoked the same
delirious encore. Everything was going on as usual, and at a few minutes
to midnight Auld Lang Syne ought not to have been difficult. It had been
sung nearly as often as the comic song, but it was shouted more
fervently somehow, less in tune somehow, and the silence at its close
was very acute. Twelve o'clock was sounding; the guests went hurrying
out; and, leaning from the windows of Two Hundred and Two, Grainger,
Lonsdale, Wedderburn, and Michael heard their footsteps clattering down
the High.</p>

<p>"I suppose we'd better begin sorting out our things to-morrow," said
Michael.</p>

		</section></section>
	</body>
</html>
