<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 1: The Jacobean</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Jacobean</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Michael found the Lower Third at <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ a jolly class. He was so particularly young that he was called “Baby,” but with enough obvious affection to make the dubious nickname a compliment. To be sure, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Braxted would often cackle jokes in a raucous voice about his age, and if Michael made a false quantity he would grumble and say he was paid as a schoolmaster not as a wet-nurse. However, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Braxted was such a dandy and wore such very sharply creased and tight trousers and was so well set up and groomed that the class was proud of his neat appearance, and would inform the Upper Third that Foxy Braxted did, at any rate, look a gentleman, a distinction which the Upper Third could scarcely claim for their own form-master.</p>
				<p>Michael liked the greater freedom of a public school. There were no home-books to be signed by governesses: there was no longer any taboo upon the revelation of Christian names. Idiosyncrasies were overlooked in the vaster society of <abbr>St.</abbr> James’. The senior boys paid no attention to the juniors, but passed them by scornfully as if they were grubs not worth the trouble of squashing. There was no longer the same zest in the little scandals and petty spitefulness of a private school. There was much greater freedom in the choice of one’s friends, and Michael no longer felt bound to restrict his intimacy to the twin Macalisters and Norton. Sometimes in the “quarter” (as the break was now called) Michael would stand on the top of the steps that led down from the great red building into the school-ground. From this point he would survey the huge green field with its archipelago of countless boys. He would think how few of their names he knew and from what distances many of them travelled each morning to school. He could wander among them by himself and not one would turn a curious head. He was at liberty even to stare at a few great ones whom athletic prowess had endowed already with legendary divinity, so that among small boys tales were told of their daring and their immortality gradually woven into the folklore of <abbr>St.</abbr> James’. Sometimes a member of the first fifteen would speak to Michael on a matter of athletic business.</p>
				<p>“What’s your name?”</p>
				<p>“Fane,” Michael would answer, hoping the while that his contemporaries might be passing and see this colloquy between a man and a god.</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes,” the hero would carelessly continue, “I’ve got you down already. Mind you turn up to Little Side at 1:45 sharp.”</p>
				<p>Little Side was the football division that included the smallest third of the school. Sometimes the hero would ask another question, as:</p>
				<p>“Do you know a kid called Smith <abbr class="name">P. L.</abbr>?”</p>
				<p>And Michael with happy blushes would be able to point out Smith <abbr class="name">P. L.</abbr> to the great figure.</p>
				<p>Michael played football on Little Side with great regularity, rushing home to dinner and rushing off again to change and be in the field by a quarter to two. He could run very fast and for that reason the lords of Little Side made him play forward, a position for which the slightness of his body made him particularly unsuited. One day, however, he managed to intercept a pass, to outwit a three-quarter, to dodge the fullback and to score a try, plumb between the posts. Luckily one of the heroes had strolled down from Pelion that afternoon to criticize Little Side and Michael was promoted from the scrum to play three-quarter back on the left wing, in which position he really enjoyed football very much indeed.</p>
				<p>It fell out that year that the <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ fifteen was the most invincible ever known in the school’s history, and every Saturday afternoon, when there was a home match, Michael in rain or wind or pale autumnal sunlight would take up his position in the crowd of spectators to cheer and shout and urge <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ to another glorious victory. Match after match that year earned immortal fame in the school records, sending the patriotic Jacobeans of every size and age home to a happy tea in the rainy twilight. Those were indeed afternoons of thunderous excitement. How everybody used to shout⁠—School⁠—Schoo-oo-ol⁠—Schoo-ol! Play up⁠—Schoo-oo-ool! James! Ja-a-a-mes! Oh, go low. Kick! Touch! Forward! Held! Offside! Go in yourself! Schoo-ool!</p>
				<p>How Michael’s heart beat at the thud of the Dulford forwards in their last desperate rush towards the School “twenty-five.” Down went the School halves, and over them like a torrent swept the Dulford pack. Down went the three-quarters in a plucky attempt to sit on the ball. Ah! There was an unanimous cry of agony, as everybody pressed against the boundary rope and craned towards the touchline until the posts creaked before the strain. Not in vain had those gallant three-quarters been smeared with mud and bruised by the boots of the surging Dulford pack; for the ball had been kicked on too far and Cutty Jackson, the School back, had fielded it miraculously. He was going to punt. “Kick!” yelled the despairing spectators. And Jackson, right under the disappointed groans of the Dulford forwards whose muscles cracked with the effort to fetch him down, kicked the ball high, high into the silvery November air. Up with that spinning greasy oval travelled the hopes of the onlookers, and, as it fell safely into touch, from all round the field rose like a rocket a huge sigh of relief that presently broke into volleys and paeans of exultation, as halftime sounded with <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ a goal to the good. How Michael admired the exhausted players when they sucked the sliced lemons and lay about in the mud; how he envied Cutty Jackson, when the lithe and noble fellow leaned against the goalpost and surveyed his audience. “Sidiness” could be easily forgiven after that never-to-be-forgotten kick into touch. Why, thought Michael, should not he himself be one day ranked as the peer of Cutty Jackson? Why should not he, six or seven years hence, penetrate the serried forces of Dulford and score a winning try, even as the referee’s whistle was lifted to sound “time?” Ambition woke in Michael, while he surveyed upon that muddy field the prostrate forms of the fifteen, like statues in a museum. Then play began and personal desires were merged in the great hope of victory for the School. Hardly now could the spectators shout, so tense was the struggle, so long was each full minute of action. Michael’s brain swam with excitement. He saw the Dulford team as giants bull-necked and invulnerable. He saw the School halves shrinking, the School three-quarters shiver like grass and the School forwards crumple before the Dulford charges. They were beaten: the untarnished record was broken: Michael could have sobbed for his side. Swifter than swallows, the Dulford three-quarters flew down the now all too short field of play. They were in! Look! they were dancing in triumph. A try to Dulford! Disconsolately the School team lined up behind their disgraced goal. Jauntily the Dulford half walked away with the shapely leather. The onlookers held their breath, as the ball, evilly accurate, dangerously direct, was poised in position for the kick at goal. The signal was given: the School team made their rush: the ball rose in the air: hung for a moment motionless, hit a goalpost, quivered and fell back. One goal to a try⁠—five points to three⁠—and <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ was leading. Then indeed did the School play up. Then indeed did every man in the team “go low”: and for the rest of the game to neither side did any advantage incline. Grunts and muttered oaths, the thud of feet, the smack of wet leather lasted continually. In the long lineups for the throw in from touch, each man marked his man viciously: the sweat poured down from hanging jaws: vests were torn, knees were grimed with mud and elbows were blackened. The scrimmages were the tightest and neatest ever watched, and neither scrum could screw the other a foot. At last the shrill whistle of the referee proclaimed the end of an immortal contest. There were cheers for the victors by the vanquished, by the vanquished for their conquerors. The spectators melted away into the gathering mist and rain, a flotsam of black umbrellas. In a few moments the school-ground was desolate and silent. Michael, as he looked at the grass ploughed into mud by the severe struggle, thought what superb heroes were in his School team; and just as he was going home, content, he saw a blazer left on a post. It was Jackson’s, and Michael, palpitating with the honour, ran as fast as he could to the changing-room through the echoing cloister beneath the school.</p>
				<p>“I say, Jackson, you left this on the ground,” he said shyly.</p>
				<p>Jackson looked up from a conversation with the Dulford fullback.</p>
				<p>“Oh, thanks very much,” he murmured, and went on with his talk.</p>
				<p>Michael would not have missed that small sentence for any dignity in the world.</p>
				<p>During his first term at <abbr>St.</abbr> James’, Michael went on with his study of the art of dancing, begun during the previous winter without much personal satisfaction and with a good deal of self-consciousness. These dancing lessons took place in the hall at Randell’s, and Michael revisited his old school with a new confidence. He found himself promoted to stay beyond the hour of pupilage in order pleasantly to pass away a second hour by dancing formally with the sisters and cousins of other boys. He had often admired last year those select Jacobeans who, buttoning white gloves, stood in a supercilious group, while their juniors clumped through the Ladies’ Chain uninspired by the swish of a single petticoat. Now he was of their sacred number. It was not surprising that under the influence of the waltz and the Circassian circle and the schottische and the quadrille and the mazurka that Michael should fall in love. He was not anxious to fall in love: many times to other boys he had mocked at woman and dilated upon the folly of matrimony. He had often declared on his way to and from school that celibacy should be the ideal of every man. He used to say how little he could understand the habit of sitting in dark corners and kissing. Even Miss Carthew he grew accustomed to treat almost with rudeness, lest some lynx-eyed friend of his should detect in his relation with her a tendency towards the sentimental. However, Muriel in her salmon-coloured, accordion-pleated frock bowled Michael off his superior pedestal. He persuaded himself that this was indeed one of those unchangeable passions of which he read or rather did read now. This great new emotion was certainly Love, for Michael could honestly affirm that as soon as he saw Muriel sitting on a chair with long black legs outstretched before her, he loved her. No other girl existed, and when he moved towards her for the pleasure of the next dance, he felt his heart beating, his cheeks on fire. Muriel seemed to like him after a fashion. At any rate, she cordially supported him in a project of long-deferred revenge upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Macrae of the Upper Fourth at Randell’s, and she kept “<i xml:lang="fr">cavé</i>” while Michael tried the door of his empty classroom off the top gallery of the hall. It was unlocked, and Michael crept in and quickly threw the contents of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Macrae’s desk out of the window and wrote on the blackboard: “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Macrae is the silliest ass in England.” Then he and Muriel walked demurely back to join the tinkling mazurka down below and, though many enquiries were set on foot as to the perpetrator of the outrage, Michael was never found out.</p>
				<p>Michael’s passion for Muriel increased with every evening of her company, and he went so far as to make friends with a very unpopular boy who lived in her road, for the sake of holding this unpopular boy in close conversation by his threshold on the chance of seeing Muriel’s grey muff in the twilight. Muriel was strangely cold for the heroine of such a romance, and indeed Michael only once saw her really vivacious, which was when he gave her a catapult. Yet sometimes she would make a clandestine appointment and talk to him for twenty minutes in a secluded terrace, so that he consoled himself with a belief in her untold affection. Michael read <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i> again on account of Dulcinea del Toboso, and he was greatly moved by the knight’s apostrophes and declamations. He longed for a confidant and was half inclined to tell Stella about Muriel; but when he came to the point Stella was engrossed in a new number of Little Folks and Michael feared she was unworthy of such a trust. The zenith of his passion was attained at the Boarders’ dance to which he and Muriel and even Stella were invited. Michael had been particularly told by Miss Carthew that he was to dance four times at least with Stella and never to allow her to be without a partner. He was in despair and felt, as he encountered the slippery floor with Stella hanging nervously on his arm, that round his neck had been tied a millstone of responsibility. There in a corner was Muriel exquisite in yellow silk, and in her hair a yellow bow. Boys flitted round her, like bees before a hive, and here was he powerless with this wretched sister.</p>
				<p>“You wait here,” said Michael. “I’ll be back in half a jiffy.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, no,” pouted Stella. “You’re not to leave me alone, Michael. Miss Carthew said you were to look after me.”</p>
				<p>Michael groaned.</p>
				<p>“Do you like ices?” he asked desperately. “You do, don’t you?”</p>
				<p>“No,” said Stella. “They make my tooth ache.”</p>
				<p>Michael almost wept with chagrin. He had planned to swap with Stella for unlimited ices all her dances with him. Then he saw a friend whom he caught hold of, and with whom he whispered fiercely for a moment.</p>
				<p>“I say, you might dance with my kiddy sister for a bit. She’s awfully fond of ices, so you needn’t really dance.”</p>
				<p>The friend said he preferred to remain independent at a dance.</p>
				<p>“No, I say, do be a decent chap,” begged Michael. “Just dance with her once and get another chap to dance with her after you’ve had your shot. Oh, do. Look here. What’ll you swap for the whole of her programme?”</p>
				<p>The friend considered the proposition in its commercial side.</p>
				<p>“Look here,” Michael began, and then, as he nervously half turned his head, he saw the crowd thickening about Muriel. He waved his arm violently in the hope that she would realize his plight and keep the rivals at arm’s length. “Look here,” he went on, “you know my bat with the whalebone splice?” This bat was Michael’s most precious possession, and even as he bartered it for love, he smelt the fragrant linseed-oil of the steeped bandages which now preserved it for summer suns.</p>
				<p>The friend’s eyes twinkled greedily.</p>
				<p>“I’ll swap that bat,” said Michael, “if you’ll make sure my kiddy sister hasn’t got a single empty place on her programme all the dance.”</p>
				<p>“All right,” said the friend. And as he was led up to Stella, Michael whispered hurriedly, when the introduction had been decorously made:</p>
				<p>“This chap’s frightfully keen on you, Stella. He simply begged me to introduce him to you.”</p>
				<p>Then from the depths of Michael’s soul a deep-seated cunning inspired him to add:</p>
				<p>“I wouldn’t at first, because he was awfully in love with another girl and I thought it hard cheese on her, because she’s here tonight. But he said he’d go home if he didn’t dance with you. So I had to.”</p>
				<p>Michael looked enquiringly at Stella, marked the smirk of satisfaction on her lips, then recklessly, almost sliding over the polished floor, he plunged through Muriel’s suitors and proffered his programme. They danced together nearly all the evening, and alas, Muriel told him that she was going to boarding-school next term. It was a blow to Michael, and the dance programme with Muriel’s name fourteen times repeated was many times looked at with sentimental pangs each night of next term before Michael went to bed a hundred miles away from Muriel at her boarding-school.</p>
				<p>However, Muriel and her porcelain-blue eyes and the full bow of her lips and the slimness and girlishness of her were forgotten in the complexities of life at a great public school. Michael often looked back to that first term in the Lower Third as a period of Arcadian simplicity, a golden age. In his second term Michael after an inconspicuous position in the honest heart of the list was not moved up, for which he was very glad, as the man who took the Upper Third was by reputation a dull driver without any of the amenities by which Foxy Braxted seasoned scholastic life.</p>
				<p>One morning, when the Lower Third had been pleasantly dissolved in laughter by Foxy’s caustic jokes at the expense of a boy who had pronounced the Hebrides as a dissyllable, following a hazardous guess that the capital of New South Wales was New York, the door of the classroom opened abruptly and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn the Headmaster sailed in.</p>
				<p>“Is there a boy called Fane in this class?” he demanded deeply.</p>
				<p>The laughter had died away when the tip of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn’s nose glistened round the edge of the door, and in the deadly silence Michael felt himself withering away.</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Braxted, cheerfully indicating Michael with his long forefinger.</p>
				<p>“Tell him to pack up his books and go to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spivey in the Hall. I’ll see him there,” rumbled <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn as, after transfixing the Lower Third with a glance of the most intense ferocity, he swung round and left the room, slamming the door behind him.</p>
				<p>“You’d better take what you’re doing to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spivey,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Braxted in his throatiest voice, “and tell him with my compliments you’re an idle young rascal. You can get your books at one o’clock.”</p>
				<p>Michael gathered together pens and paper, and left his desk in the Lower Third.</p>
				<p>“Goodbye, sir,” he said as he went away, for he knew Foxy Braxted really rather liked him.</p>
				<p>“Goodbye,” cackled his late form-master.</p>
				<p>The Lower Third followed his exit from their midst with an united grin of farewell, and Michael was presently interviewing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spivey in the Hall. He realized that he was now a member of that assorted Purgatory, the Special, doomed to work there for a term of days or weeks and after this period of intensive culture to be planted out in a higher form beyond the ordinary mechanics of promotion. Mostly in the Special class Michael worshipped the two gods <i xml:lang="el">εἱ</i> and <i xml:lang="el">ἑἁν</i>, and his whole life was devoted to the mastery of Greek conditional sentences in their honour.</p>
				<p>The Special form at <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ never consisted of more than fourteen or fifteen boys, all of whom were taught individually, and none of whom knew when they would be called away. The Special was well called Purgatory. Every morning and every afternoon the inmates toiled away at their monotonous work, sitting far removed from one another in the great echoing hall, concentrated for the most part on <i xml:lang="el">εἱ</i> and <i xml:lang="el">ἑἁν</i>. Every morning and every afternoon at a fatal moment the swinging doors of the lower end of the Hall would clash together, and the heavy tread of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn would be heard as he rolled up one of the two aisles between the long desks. Every morning and every afternoon <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn would sit beside some boy to inspect his work; and every morning and every afternoon hearts would beat the faster, until <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn had seized his victim, when the other boys would simultaneously work with an almost lustful concentration.</p>
				<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn was to Michael the personification of majesty, dominion, ferocity and awe. He was huge of build, with a long grey beard to which adhered stale morsels of food and the acrid scent of strong cigars. His face was ploughed and fretted with indentations volcanic: scoriac torrents flowed from his eyes, his forehead was seared and cleft with frowning crevasses and wrinkled with chasms. His ordinary clothes were stained with soup and rank with tobacco smoke, but over them he wore a full and swishing gown of silk. When he spoke his voice rumbled in the titanic deeps of his body, or if he were angry, it burst forth in an appalling roar that shook the great hall. His method of approach was enough to frighten anyone, for he would swing along up the aisle and suddenly plunge into a seat beside the chosen boy, pushing him along the form with his black bulk. He would seize the boy’s pen and after scratching his own head with the end of the holder would follow word by word the liturgy of <i xml:lang="el">εἱ</i> and <i xml:lang="el">ἑἁν</i>, tapping the paper between the lines as he read each sentence, so that at the end of his examination the page was peppered with dots of ink. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn, although he had a voice like ten bulls, was himself very deaf and after bellowing in a paralyzing bass he would always finish a remark with an intoned “um?” of tenor interrogation to exact assent or answer from his terrified pupil. When due reverence was absent from Michael’s worship of <i xml:lang="el">εἱ</i> and <i xml:lang="el">ἑἁν</i> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn would frown at him and roar and bellow and rumble and thunder and peal his execration and contempt. Then suddenly his fury would be relieved by this eruption, and he would affix his initials to the bottom of the page⁠—<abbr class="name">S. C. B.</abbr> standing for Samuel Constantine Brownjohn⁠—after which endorsement he would pat Michael’s head, rumble an unintelligible joke and plunge down beside another victim.</p>
				<p>One of Michael’s greatest trials was his inability to convince Miss Carthew how unutterably terrific <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn really was. She insisted that Michael exaggerated his appearance and manners, and simply would not believe the stories Michael told of parents and guardians who had trembled with fear when confronted by the Old Man. In many ways Michael found Miss Carthew was very contentious nowadays, and very seldom did an evening pass without a hot argument between him and her. To be sure, she used to say it was Michael who had grown contradictory and self-assertive, but Michael could not see that he had radically altered since the first moment he saw Miss Carthew, now nearly four years ago.</p>
				<p>Michael’s purgatory in the Special continued for several weeks, and he grew bored by the monotony of his work that was only interrupted by the suspense of the Headmaster’s invasions. Sometimes <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn would make his dreadful descent early in the “hour,” and then relieved from the necessity to work with such ardour, Michael would gaze up to the raftered roof of the hall and stare at the long lancet windows filled with the coats of arms in stained glass of famous bygone Jacobeans. He would wonder whether in those windows still unfilled a place would one day be found for his name and whether years and years hence, boys doing Greek conditional sentences would speculate upon the boyhood of Charles Michael Saxby Fane. Then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spivey would break into his dreams with some rather dismal joke, and Michael would make blushing amends to <i xml:lang="el">εἱ</i> and <i xml:lang="el">ἑἁν</i> by writing as quickly as he could three complete conditional sentences in honour and praise of the twin gods. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spivey, the master in charge of the Special, was mild and good-humoured. No one could fail to like him, but he was not exhilarating; and Michael was greatly pleased when one morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spivey informed him that he was to move into the Shell. Michael was glad to dodge the Upper Third, for he knew that life in the Shell under <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech would be an experience.</p>
				<p>Chaps had often said to Michael, “Ah, wait till you get into old Neech’s form.”</p>
				<p>“Is he decent?” Michael would enquire.</p>
				<p>“Some chaps like him,” the chaps in question would ambiguously reply.</p>
				<p>When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spivey introduced Michael to the Shell, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech was sitting in his chair with his feet on the desk and a bandana handkerchief over his face, apparently fast asleep. The inmates of the Shell were sitting, vigorously learning something that seemed to cause them great hardship; for every face was puzzled and from time to time sighs floated upon the classroom air.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spivey coughed nervously to attract <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech’s attention, and when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech took no notice, he tapped nervously on the desk with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech’s ruler. Somewhere in the back row of desks a titter of mirth was faintly audible. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech was presumably aroused with great suddenness by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spivey’s tapping and swung his legs off the desk and, sitting bolt upright in his chair, glared at the intruders.</p>
				<p>“Oh, the Headmaster has sent Fane from the Special,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spivey nervously explained.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech threw his eyes up to the ceiling and looked as if Michael’s arrival were indeed the last straw.</p>
				<p>“Twenty-six miserable boys are already having a detestable and stultifying education in this wretched class,” lamented <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech. “And now comes a twenty-seventh. Very well. Very well. I’ll stuff him with the abominable jargon and filthy humbug. I’ll cram him with the undigested balderdash. Oh, you unhappy boy,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech went on, directly addressing Michael. “You unfortunate imp and atom. Sit down, if you can find a desk. Sit down and fill your mind with the ditchwater I’m paid to teach you.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spivey had by this time reached the door and with a nervous nod he abruptly vanished.</p>
				<p>“Now then everybody,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech, closing his lips very tightly in a moment’s pause and then breaking forth loudly. “You have had one quarter of an hour to learn the repetition you should all have learned last night. Begin, that mooncalf with a dirty collar, the boy Wilberforce, and if any stupid stoat or stockfish boggles over one word, I’ll flay him. Begin! The boy Fane can sit still. The others stand up!” shouted <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech. “Now the boy Wilberforce!</p>
				<p><i xml:lang="la">Tityre tu patulæ recubans sub tegmine fagi⁠—</i><br/>
					Go on, you bladder of idiocy.”</p>
				<p>Michael watched the boy Wilberforce concentrate all his faculties upon not making a single mistake, and hoped that he would satisfy this alarming master. While Wilberforce spoke the lines of the Eclogue, panting between each hexameter, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech strode up and down the room with his arms crossed behind him, wagging the tail of his gown. Sometimes he would strike his chin and, looking upwards, murmur to himself the lines with an expression of profound emotion. Wilberforce managed to get through, and another boy called Verney took up the Eclogue successfully, and so on through the class it was successfully sustained.</p>
				<p>“You pockpuddings, you abysmal apes,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech groaned at his class. “Why couldn’t you have learned those lines at home? You idle young blackguards, you pestilent oafs, you fools of the first water, write them out. Write them out five times.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, sir,” the Shell protested in unison.</p>
				<p>“Oh, sir!” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech mimicked. “Oh, sir! Well, I’ll let you off this time, but next time, next time, my stars and garters, I’ll flog any boy that makes a single mistake.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech was a dried-up, snuff-coloured man, with a long thin nose and stringy neck and dark piercing eyes. He always wore a frock-coat green with age and a very old top-hat and very shiny trousers. He read Spanish newspapers and secondhand-book catalogues all the way to school and was never seen to walk with either a master or a boy. His principal hatreds were Puseyism and actors; but as two legends were extant, in one of which he had been seen to get into a first-class railway carriage with a copy of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Church Times</i> and in the other of which he had been seen smoking a big cigar in the stalls of the Alhambra Theatre, it was rather doubtful whether his two hatreds were as deeply felt as they were fervently expressed. He was reputed to have the largest library in England outside the British Museum and also to own seven dachshunds. He was a man who fell into ungovernable rages, when he would flog a boy savagely and, the flogging done, fling his cane out of the window in a fit of remorse. He would set impositions of unprecedented length, and revile himself for ruining the victim’s handwriting. He would keep his class in for an hour and mutter at himself for a fool to keep himself in as well. Once, he locked a boy in at one o’clock, and the boy’s mother wrote a long letter to complain that her son had been forced to go without his dinner. Legend said that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech had been reprimanded by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brownjohn on account of this, which explained <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech’s jibes at the four pages of complaint from the parents that were supposed inevitably to follow his mildest rebuke of the most malignant boy.</p>
				<p>Michael enjoyed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech’s eccentricities after the drabness of the Special. He was lucky enough to be in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech’s good graces, because he was almost the only boy who could say in what novel of Dickens or Scott some famous character occurred. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech had a conception of education quite apart from the mere instilling of declensions and genders and <i xml:lang="la">num</i> and <i xml:lang="la">nonne</i> and <i xml:lang="la">quin</i> and <i xml:lang="el">εἱ</i> and <i xml:lang="el">ἑἁν</i>. He taught Geography and English History and English Literature, so far as the school curriculum allowed him. Divinity and English meant more to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech than a mere hour of Greek Testament and a pedant’s fiddling with the text of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Lycidas</i>. Michael had a dim appreciation of his excellence, even in the Shell: he identified him in some way with <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tom Brown’s Schooldays</i>, with prints of Eton and Westminster, with Miss Carthew’s tales of her brother on the Britannia. Michael recognized him as a character in those old calf-bound books he loved to read at home. Once <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech called a boy a dog-eared Rosinante, and Michael laughed aloud and when fiercely <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech challenged him, denying he had ever heard of Rosinante, Michael soon showed that he had read <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i> with some absorption. After that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech put Michael in one of the favoured desks by the window and would talk to him, while he warmed his parchment-covered hands upon the hot-water pipes. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech was probably the first person to impress Michael with the beauty of the past or rather to give him an impetus to arrange his own opinions. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech, lamenting the old days long gone, thundering against modernity and denouncing the whole system of education that <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ fostered, was almost the only schoolmaster with a positive personality whom Michael ever encountered. Michael had scarcely realized, until he reached the Shell, in what shadowy dates of history <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ was already a famous school. Now in the vulgarity of its crimson brick, in the servility with which it truckled to bourgeois ideals, in the unimaginative utility it worshipped, Michael vaguely apprehended the loss of a soul. He would linger in the corridors, reading the lists of distinguished Jacobeans, and during Prayers he would with new interest speculate upon the lancet windows and their stained-glass heraldry, until vaguely in his heart grew a patriotism more profound than the mere joy of a football victory, a patriotism that submerged Hammersmith and Kensington and made him proud that he himself was veritably a Jacobean. He was still just as eager to see <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ defeat Dulford at cricket, just as proud to read that <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ had won more open scholarships at the Universities than some North-country grammar school; but at the same time he was consoled in the event of defeat by pride in the endurance of his school through so many years of English History.</p>
				<p>It was about this time that Michael saw in a secondhand shop a print of the tower of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s College, Oxford. It was an old print and the people small as emmets, who thronged the base of that slim and lovely tower, were dressed in a bygone fashion that very much appealed to Michael. This print gave him the same thrill he experienced in listening to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech’s reminiscences or in reading <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i> or in poring over the inscriptions of famous Jacobeans. Michael had already taken it as an axiom that one day he would go to Oxford, and now he made up his mind he would go to <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s College. At this moment people were hurrying past that tower, even as they hurried in this grey print and even as Michael himself would one day hurry. Meanwhile, he was enjoying the Shell and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech’s eccentricities and the prospect of winning the Junior Form Cricket Shield, a victory in which Michael would participate as scorer for the Shell.</p>
				<p>Summer suns shone down upon the green playground of <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ rippling with flannelled forms. The radiant air was filled with merry cries, with the sounds of bat and ball, with boyhood in action. In the great red mass of the school buildings the golden clock moved on through each day’s breathless hour of cricket. The Junior Shield was won by the Shell, and the proud victors, after a desperate argument with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech, actually persuaded him to take his place in the commemorative photograph. School broke up and the summer holidays began.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
