<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 6: Tinderbox Lane</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-4-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Tinderbox Lane</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Next morning, when he woke, Michael made up his mind to leave Leppard Street finally in the course of this day. He could not bear the thought that he would only have to lean out of his window to see the actual roof which covered that unforgettable den beneath him. He wondered what would be the best thing to do with the furniture. It might be worth while to install Barnes in these rooms and pay his rent for some months instead of the salary which, now that Lily had been seen, was no longer a justifiable expenditure. He certainly would prefer that Barnes should never meet Lily now, and he regretted he had revealed her name. Still he had a sort of affection for Barnes which precluded the notion of deserting him altogether. These rooms with their simple and unmuffled furniture, the green shelves and narrow white bed, would be good for his character. He would also leave a few chosen books behind, and he would write and ask Nigel Stewart to visit here from time to time. Michael dressed himself and went upstairs to interview Barnes where he lay beneath a heap of bedclothes.</p>
				<p>“Oh, I daresay I could make the rooms look all right,” said Barnes. “But what about coal?”</p>
				<p>“I shall pay for coal and light as well as the rent.”</p>
				<p>“I thought you’d find it a bit dismal here,” said Barnes knowingly. “I wonder you’ve stuck it out as long as you have.”</p>
				<p>“After February,” Michael said, “I may want to come to some other arrangement; but you can count on being here till then. Of course, you understand that when the three months are up, I shan’t be able to allow you five pounds a week any longer.”</p>
				<p>“No, I never supposed you would,” said Barnes, in a tone of resignation.</p>
				<p>Michael hesitated whether to speak to him about <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith or not: however, probably he was aware of her existence already, and it could do no harm to mention it.</p>
				<p>“Did you know that there was a woman living down in the basement here?” he asked.</p>
				<p>“I didn’t know there was one here; but it’s not a very rare occurrence in this part of London, nor any other part of London, if it comes to that.”</p>
				<p>“If you hear any row going on down there,” said Michael, “you had better interfere at once.”</p>
				<p>“Who with?” Barnes inquired indignantly.</p>
				<p>“With the row,” said Michael. “If the woman is being badly treated on account of money she owes, you must let me know immediately.”</p>
				<p>“Well, I’m not in the old tear’s secret, am I?” asked Barnes, in an injured tone. “You can’t expect me to go routing about after every old fly-by-night stuck in a basement.”</p>
				<p>“I’m particularly anxious to know that she is all right,” Michael insisted.</p>
				<p>“Oh well, of course, if she’s a friend of yours, Fane, that’s another matter. If it’s any little thing to oblige you, why certainly I’ll do it.”</p>
				<p>Michael said goodbye and left him in bed. Then he called in to see the Solutionist, who was also in bed.</p>
				<p>“I’ve got a commission for you,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>The Solutionist’s watery eyes brightened faintly.</p>
				<p>“You’re fond of animals, aren’t you?” Michael went on. “I see you feeding your Belgian hares. Well, I’m interested in a cat who appreciated my point of view. I want you to see that this cat has a quart of milk left for her outside <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith’s door every morning. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith lives in the basement. You must explain to her that you are fond of animals; but you mustn’t mention me. Here’s a check for five pounds. Spend half this on the cat and the other half on your rabbits.”</p>
				<p>The Solutionist held the check between his tremulous fingers.</p>
				<p>“I couldn’t cash this nowadays,” he said helplessly. “And get a quart of milk for a cat? Why, the thing would burst.”</p>
				<p>“All right. I’ll send you postal orders,” said Michael. “Now I’m going away for a bit. Never mind if a quart is too much. I want that amount left every day. You’ll do what I ask? And you’ll promise not to say a word about me?”</p>
				<p>The Solutionist promised, and Michael left him looking more completely puzzled than he had ever seen him.</p>
				<p>Michael could not bring himself to the point either of going down into the basement or of calling to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne from the entrance to her cave; and as the bell-pull in his room had never been mended, he did not know how to reach her. The existence of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith had dreadfully complicated the mechanism of Number One. He ought to have made Barnes get out of bed and fetch her. By good luck Michael saw from his window the landlady standing at the top of the area steps. He ran out and asked her to come and speak to him.</p>
				<p>“I see,” she said. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnes is to have your rooms, and you’re paying in advance up to February. Oh, and his coal and his gas as well? I see. Well, that you can settle month by month. Through me? Oh, yes.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne was in a very good temper this morning. Michael could not help wondering if <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith had paid some arrears of her rent.</p>
				<p>“Do you think <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cleghorne would go and fetch me a hansom?” Michael asked.</p>
				<p>“He’s still in his bed, but I’ll go myself.”</p>
				<p>This cheerfulness was really extraordinary; and Michael was flattered. Already he was beginning to feel some of the deference mixed with hate which throughout the underworld was felt toward landladies. Her condescension struck him with the sense of a peculiar favor, as if it were being bestowed from a superior height.</p>
				<p>Michael packed up his kitbags and turned for a last look at the white rooms in Leppard Street. Suddenly it struck him that he would take with him one or two of the pictures and present them to Maurice’s studio in Grosvenor Road. <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Mona Lisa</i> should go there, and the <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Prince of Orange</i> whom himself was supposed to resemble slightly, and <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Don Baltazar</i> on his big horse. They should be the contribution which he had been intending for some time to pay to that household. The cab was at the door, and presently Michael drove away from Leppard Street.</p>
				<p>As soon as he was in the hansom he felt he could begin to think of Lily again, and though he knew that probably he was going to suffer a good deal when they met, he nevertheless thought of her now with elation. It had not seemed to be so sparkling a morning in Leppard Street; but driving toward Maurice’s studio along the banks of the river, Michael thought it was the most crystalline morning he had ever known.</p>
				<p>“I’ve brought you these pictures,” he explained to Maurice, and let the gift account for his own long disappearance from communion with his friends. “They’re pretty hackneyed, but I think it’s rather good for you to have a few hackneyed things amid the riot of originality here. What are you doing, Mossy?”</p>
				<p>“Well, I’m rather hoping to get a job as dramatic critic on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Point of View</i>.”</p>
				<p>“You haven’t met your ladylove yet?”</p>
				<p>“No, rather not, worse luck. Still, there’s plenty of time. What about you?” Maurice asked the question indifferently. He regarded his friend as a stone where women were concerned.</p>
				<p>“I’ve seen her,” said Michael. He simply had to give himself the pleasure of announcing so much.</p>
				<p>“By Jove, have you really? You’ve actually found your fate?” Maurice was evidently very much excited by Michael’s lapse into humanity; he had been snubbed so often when he had rhapsodized over girls. “What’s she like?”</p>
				<p>“I haven’t spoken to her yet. I’ve only seen her in the distance.”</p>
				<p>“And you’ve really fallen in love? I say, do stay and have lunch with me here. Castleton isn’t coming back from the Temple until after tea.”</p>
				<p>Michael would have liked to sit at the window and talk of Lily, while he stared out over the sea of roofs under one of which at this very moment herself might be looking in his direction. However, he thought if he once began to talk about Lily to Maurice, he would tell him too much, and he might regret that afterward. Yet he could not resist saying that she was tall and fair and slim. Such epithets might be applied to many girls, and it was only for himself that in this case they had all the thrilling significance they did.</p>
				<p>“I like fair girls best,” Maurice agreed. “But most fair girls are dolls. If I met one who wasn’t, I should be hopelessly in love with her.”</p>
				<p>“Perhaps you will,” Michael said. Since he had seen Lily he felt very generous, and even more than generosity he felt that he actually had the power to offer to Maurice dozens of fair girls from whom he could choose his own ideal. Really he must not stay a moment longer in the studio, or he would be blurting out the whole tale of Lily; and were she to be his, he must hold secrets about her that could never be unfolded.</p>
				<p>“I really must bolt off,” he declared. “I’ve got a cab waiting.”</p>
				<p>Michael drove along to Cheyne Walk, and when he reached home, it caused the parlormaid not a flicker to receive him and to take his luggage and inquire what should be obtained for his lunch.</p>
				<p>“Life’s really too easy in this house,” he thought. “It’s so impossible to surprise the servants here that one would give up trying ultimately. I suppose that will be the beginning of settling down. At this rate, I shall settle down much too soon. Yes, life is too easy here.”</p>
				<p>Michael went to the Orient that night certain that he would meet Lily at once, so much since he left Leppard Street had the imagination of her raced backward and forward in his brain. Everything that would have made their meeting painful in such surroundings was forgotten in the joyful prospect at hand. The amount they would have to talk about was really tremendous. Love had destroyed time so completely that Lily was to be exactly the same as when first he had met her in Kensington Gardens. However, her appearance on the pavement outside the theater had made such a vivid new impression that Michael did pay as much attention to lapsing time as to visualize her now in that black dress. Otherwise he was himself again of six years ago, with only the delightful difference that he was now independent and could carry her forthwith into marriage. The knowledge that from a material point of view he could do this filled him with a magnificent consciousness of life’s plenitude. So far, all his experiments in living had been bounded by ignorance or credulity on his own side, and on the side of other people by their unsuitableness for experiments. Certainly he had made discoveries, but they might better be called disillusionments. Now here was Lily who would give him herself to discover, who would open for him, not a looking-glass world in which human nature reflected itself in endless reduplications of perversity, but a world such as lovers only know, wherein the greatest deeps are themselves. Michael scarcely bothered to worry himself with the thought that Lily had embarked upon her own discoveries apart from him; she had been bewitched again by his romantic spells into the innocent girl of seventeen. All his hopes, all his quixotry, all his capacity for idealization, all his prejudice and impulsiveness converged upon her. Whatever had lately happened to spoil his theory of behavior was discounted; and even the very theory fell to pieces in this intoxication of happiness.</p>
				<p>With so much therefore to make him buoyant, it was depressing to visit the Orient that evening without a glimpse of Lily. The disappointment threw Michael very unpleasantly back into those evenings when he had come here regularly and had always been haunted by the dread that, when he did see her, his resolve would collapse in the presence of a new Lily wrought upon by man and not made more lovable thereby. The vision of her last night (it was only last night) had swept him aloft; the queer adventure with the woman in the basement had exalted him still higher upon his determination; his flight from Leppard Street and his return to Cheyne Walk had helped to strengthen his hopefulness. Now he had returned to this circumambient crowd, looking round as each newcomer came up the steps, and all the while horribly aware that this evening Lily was not coming to the Orient. He had never been upset like this since his resolve was taken. The glimpse of her last night had made him very impatient, and he reviled himself again for having been such a fool as to let her escape. He fell in a rage with his immobility here in London. He demanded why it was not possible to swirl in widening circles round the city until he found her. He was no longer content to remain in this aquarium, stuck like a mollusc to the side of the tank. He wanted to see her again. He was fretful for her slow contemptuous walk and her debonair smile. He wanted to see her again. Already this quest was becoming the true torment of love. Every single other person in sight was a dreary automaton in whom he took no trace of interest. Every movement, every laugh, every shadow made him repine at its uselessness to him. All those years at Oxford of dreams and hesitations had let him store up within himself a very fury of love. He had been living falsely all this time: there had never been one dull hour which could not have been enchanted by her to the most glorious hour imaginable. He had realized that when he saw her last night; he had realized all the waste, all the deadness, all the idiotic philosophy and impotence of these years without her. How the fancy of her vexed him now; how easily could he in his frustration knock down the individuals of this senseless restless crowd, one after another, like the dummies of humanity they were.</p>
				<p>The last tableau of the ballet had dissolved behind the falling curtain. Lily was not here tonight, and he hurried out into Piccadilly. She must be somewhere close at hand. It was impossible for her to come casually like that to the Orient and afterward to disappear for weeks. Or was she a man’s mistress, the mistress of a man of forty? He could picture him. He would be a stockbroker, the sort of man whom one saw in first-class railway carriages traveling up to town in the morning and reading <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Financial Times</i>. He would wear a hideous orchid in his buttonhole and take her to Brighton for weekends. He knew just the shade of bluish pink that his cheeks were; and the way his neck looked against his collar; the shape of his mustache, the smell of his cigar, and his handicap at golf.</p>
				<p>It was impossible that Lily could be the mistress of a man like that. Last night she had come out of the Orient with a girl. Obviously they must at this moment be somewhere near Piccadilly. Michael rushed along as wildly as a cat running after its tail. He entered restaurant after restaurant, café after café, standing in the doorways and staring at the tables one after another. The swinging doors would often hit him, as people came in; the drinkers or the diners would often laugh at his frown and his pale, eager gaze; often the manager would hurry up and ask what he could do for him, evidently suspecting the irruption of a lunatic.</p>
				<p>Michael’s behavior in the street was even more noticeable. He often ricocheted from the inside to the outside of the pavement to get a nearer view of a passing hansom whose occupant had faintly resembled Lily. He mounted omnibuses going in all sorts of strange directions, because he fancied for an instant that he had caught a glimpse of Lily among the passengers. It was closing-time before he thought he had been searching for five minutes; and when the lights were dimmed, he walked up and down Regent Street, up and down Piccadilly, up and down Coventry Street, hurrying time after time to pursue a walk that might have been hers.</p>
				<p>By one o’clock Piccadilly was nearly empty, and it was an insult to suppose that Lily would be found among these furtive women with their waylaying eyes in the gloom. Michael went back tired out to Cheyne Walk. On the following night he visited the Orient again and afterward searched every likely and unlikely place in the neighborhood of the heart of pleasure. He went also to the Empire and to the Alhambra; sometimes hurrying from one to the other twice in the evening, when panics that he was missing Lily overtook him. He met Lonsdale one night at the Empire, and Lonsdale took him to several nightclubs which gave a great zest to Michael’s search; for he became a member of them himself, and so possessed every night another hour or more before he had to give up hope of finding her.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane wrote to him from Cannes to say she thought that, as she was greatly enjoying herself on the Riviera, she would not come home for Christmas. Michael was relieved by her letter, because he had felt qualms about deserting her, and he would have found it difficult, impossible really, to go away so far from London and Lily.</p>
				<p>Guy wrote to him several times, urging him to come and stay at Plashers Mead. Finally he went there for a weekend; and Guy spent the whole time rushing in and out of the house on the chance of meeting Pauline Grey, the girl whom Michael had seen with him in the canoe last summer. Guy explained the complications of his engagement to Pauline; how it seemed he would soon have to choose between love and art; how restrictions were continually being put upon their meeting each other; and how violently difficult life was becoming here at Plashers Mead, where Michael had prophesied such abundant ease. Michael was very sympathetic, and when he met Pauline on a soft December morning, he did think she was beautiful and very much like the wild rose that Guy had taken as the symbol of her. She seemed such a fairy child that he could not imagine problems of conduct in which she could be involved. Nevertheless, it was impossible not to feel that over Plashers Mead brooded a sense of tragedy: and yet it seemed ridiculous to compare Guy’s difficulties with his own.</p>
				<p>For Christmas Michael went down to Hardingham, where Stella and Alan had by this time settled down in their fat country. He was delighted to see how much the squire Alan was already become; and there was certainly something very attractive in these two young people moving about that grave Georgian house. The house itself was of red brick and stood at the end of an avenue of oaks in a park of about two hundred acres. That it could ever have not been there; that ever those lawns had been defaced by builder’s rubbish was now inconceivable. So too within, Michael could not realize that anybody else but Stella and Alan had ever stood in this drawing-room, looking out of the tall windows whose sills scarcely rose above the level of the grass outside; that anyone else but Stella and Alan had ever laughed in this solemn library with its pilasters and calf-bound volumes and terrestrial globe; that anyone else but Stella and Alan had ever sat at dinner under the eyes of those bag-wigged squires, that long-nosed Light Dragoon, or that girl in her chip hat, holding a bunch of cherries.</p>
				<p>“No doubt you’ve got a keen scent for tradition,” said Michael to Stella. “But really you have been able to get into the manner surprisingly fast. These cocker-spaniels, for instance, who follow you both round, and the deerhound on the steps of the terrace⁠—Stella, I’m afraid the concert platform has taught you the value of effect; and where do hounds meet tomorrow?”</p>
				<p>“We’re simply loving it here,” Stella said. “But I think the piano is feeling a little bit out of his element. He’s stiff with being on his best behavior.”</p>
				<p>“I’m hoping to get rather a good pitch in Six Ash field,” said Alan. “I’ll show it to you tomorrow morning.”</p>
				<p>The butler came in with news of callers:</p>
				<p>“The Countess of Stilton and Lady Anne Varley.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, damn!” Stella exclaimed, when the butler had retired. “I really don’t think people ought to call just before Christmas. However, you’ve both got to come in and be polite.”</p>
				<p>Michael managed to squeeze himself into a corner of the drawing-room, whence he could watch Lady Stilton and her daughter talking to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Prescott-Merivale.</p>
				<p>“We ought not to have bothered you in this busy week before Christmas, but my husband has been so ill in Marienbad, ever since the summer really, that we only got home a fortnight ago. So very trying. And I’ve been longing to meet you. Poor Dick Prescott was a great friends of ours.”</p>
				<p>Michael had a sudden intuition that Prescott had bequeathed Stella’s interests to Lady Stilton, who probably knew all about her. He wondered if Stella had guessed this.</p>
				<p>“And Anne heard you play at King’s Hall. Didn’t you, Anne dear?”</p>
				<p>Lady Anne nodded and blushed.</p>
				<p>“That child is going to worship Stella,” Michael thought.</p>
				<p>“We’re hoping you will all be able to come and dine with us for Twelfth Night. My husband is so fond of keeping up old English festivals. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fane, you’ll still be at Hardingham, I hope, so that we may have the pleasure of seeing you as well?”</p>
				<p>Michael said he was afraid he would have to be back in town.</p>
				<p>“What absolute rot!” Stella cried. “Of course you’ll be here.”</p>
				<p>But Michael insisted that he would be gone.</p>
				<p>“They tell us you’ve been buying Herefords, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Merivale. My husband was so much interested and is so much looking forward to seeing your stock; but at present he must not drive far. I’ve also heard of you from my youngest boy who went up to Christ Church last October year. He is very much excited to think that Hardingham is going to have such a famous⁠—what is it called, Anne?⁠—some kind of a bowler.”</p>
				<p>“A googlie bowler, I expect you mean, mother,” said Lady Anne.</p>
				<p>“Wasn’t he in the Eton eleven?” asked Alan.</p>
				<p>“Well, no. Something happened to oust him at the last moment,” said Lady Stilton. “Possibly a superior player.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, no, mother!” Lady Anne indignantly declared. “He would have played for certain against Harrow, if he hadn’t sprained his ankle at the nets the week before.”</p>
				<p>“I do hope you’ll let him come and see you this vacation,” Lady Stilton said.</p>
				<p>“Oh, rather. I shall be awfully keen to talk about the cricket round here,” Alan replied. “I’m just planning out a new pitch now.”</p>
				<p>“How delightful all this is,” thought Michael, with visions of summer evenings.</p>
				<p>Soon Lady Stilton and her daughter went away, having plainly been a great success with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Prescott-Merivale.</p>
				<p>“Of course, <em>you’ve</em> got to marry Anne,” said Stella to Michael, as soon as they were comfortably round the great fire in the library.</p>
				<p>“Alan,” Michael appealed. “Is it impossible for you to nip now forever this bud of matchmaking?”</p>
				<p>“I think it’s rather a good idea,” said Alan. “I knew young Varley by sight. He’s a very sound bat.”</p>
				<p>“I shan’t come here again,” Michael threatened, “until you’ve dissolved this alliance of mutual admiration. Instead of agreeing with Stella to marry me to every girl you meet, why don’t you devote yourself to the task of making Huntingdon a first-class county in cricket? Stella might captain the team.”</p>
				<p>Time passed very pleasantly with long walks and rides and drives, with long evenings of cutthroat bridge and Schumann; but on New Year’s morning Michael said he must go back to London. Nor would he let himself be deterred by Stella’s gibes.</p>
				<p>“I admit you’re as happy as you can be,” he said. “Now surely you, after so much generosity on my side, will admit that I may know almost as well as yourselves how to make myself happy, though not yet married.”</p>
				<p>“Michael, you’re having an affair with some girl,” Stella said accusingly.</p>
				<p>He shook his head.</p>
				<p>“Swear?”</p>
				<p>“By everything I believe in, I vow I’m not having an affair with any girl. I wish I were.”</p>
				<p>His luggage was in the hall, and the dogcart was waiting. At King’s Cross he found a taxi, which was so difficult to do in those days that it made him hail the achievement as a good omen for the New Year.</p>
				<p>Near South Kensington Station he caught sight of a poster advertising a carnival in the neighborhood: he thought it looked rather attractive with the bright colors glowing into the gray January day. Later on in the afternoon, when he went to his tobacconist’s in the King’s Road, he saw the poster again and read that tonight at Redcliffe Hall, Fulham Road, would take place a Grand Carnival and Masked Ball for the benefit of some orphanage connected with licensed victualing. Tickets were on sale in various public-houses of the neighborhood, at seven and sixpence for gentlemen and five shillings for ladies.</p>
				<p>“Ought to be very good,” commented the tobacconist. “Well, we want a bit of brightening up nowadays down this way, and that’s a fact. Why, I can remember Cremorne Gardens. Tut-tut! Bless my soul. Yes, and the old World’s End. That’s going back into the seventies, that is. And it seems only yesterday.”</p>
				<p>“I rather wish I’d got a ticket,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>“Why not let me get you one, sir, and send it round to Cheyne Walk? I suppose you’d like one for a lady as well?”</p>
				<p>“No, I’ll have two men’s tickets.”</p>
				<p>Michael had a vague notion of getting Maurice or Lonsdale to accompany him, and he went off immediately to 422 Grosvenor Road; but the studio was deserted. Nor was he successful in finding Lonsdale. Nobody seemed to have finished his holidays yet. It would be rather boring to go alone, he thought; but when he found the tickets waiting for him, they seemed to promise a jolly evening, even if he did no more than watch other people enjoying themselves. No doubt there would be plenty of spectators without masks, like himself, and in ordinary evening dress. So about half-past nine Michael set off alone to the carnival.</p>
				<p>Redcliffe Hall, viewed from the outside in the January fog which was deepening over the city, seemed the last place in the world likely to contain a carnival. It was one of those dismal gothic edifices which, having passed through ecclesiastical and municipal hands with equal loss to both, awaits a suitable moment for destruction before it rises again in a phoenix of new flats. However, the awning hung with Japanese lanterns that ran from the edge of the curb up to the entrance made it now not positively forbidding.</p>
				<p>Michael went up to the gallery and watched the crowd of dancers. Many of the fancy dresses had a very homely look, but there were also professional equipments from costumiers and a very few really beautiful inventions. The medley of colors, the motion of the dance, the sound of the music, the streamers of bunting and the ribbons fluttering round the Maypole in the middle of the room, all combined to give Michael an illusion of a very jocund assemblage. There were plenty of men dancing without masks, which was rather a pity, as their dull, ordinary faces halted abruptly the play of fancy. On second thoughts he was glad such revelers were allowed upon the floor, since as the scene gradually began to affect him he felt it might be amusing for himself to dance once or twice before the evening ended. With this notion in view, he began to follow more particularly the progress of different girls, balancing their charms one against another, and always deriving a good deal of pleasure from the reflection that, while at this moment they did not know of his existence, in an hour’s time he might have entered their lives. This thought did give a romantic zest to an entertainment which would otherwise have been quite cut off from his appreciation.</p>
				<p>Suddenly Michael’s heart began to quicken: the blood came in rushes and swift recessions that made him feel cold and sick. Two girls walking away from him along the side of the hall⁠—those two pierrettes in black⁠—that one with the pale blue pompons was Lily! Why didn’t she turn round? It must be Lily. The figure, the walk, the hair were hers. The pierrettes turned, but as they were masked Michael could still not be sure if one were Lily. They were dancing together now. It must be Lily. He leaned over the rail of the gallery to watch them sweep round below him, so that he might listen if by chance above the noise Lily’s languorous voice could reach him. Michael became almost positive that it was she. There could not be another girl to seem so like her. He hurried down from the gallery and stood in the entrance to the ballroom. Where were they now? They were coming toward him: the other pierrette with the rose pompons said something as they passed. It could only be Lily who bowed her head like that in lazy assent. It was Lily! Should he call out to her, when next they passed him? If it were not Lily, what a fool he would look. If it were not Lily, it would not matter what he looked, for the disappointment would outweigh everything else. They were going up the room again. They were turning the corner again. They were sweeping toward him again. They were passing him again. He called “Lily! Lily!” in a voice sharp with eagerness. Neither girl gave a sign of attention. It was not she, after all. Yet his voice might have been drowned in the noise of the dance. He would call again; but again they passed him by unheeding. The dance was over. They had stopped at the other end of the room. He pressed forward against the egress of the dancers. He pressed forward roughly, and once or twice he heard grumbling murmurs because he had deranged a difficult piece of costumery. He was conscious of angry masks regarding him; and then he was free of the crowd, and before him, talking together under a canopy of holly were the two pierrettes. The musicians sat among the palms looking at him as they rested upon their instruments. Michael felt that his voice was going to refuse to utter her name:</p>
				<p>“Lily! Lily!”</p>
				<p>The pierrette with the pale blue pompons turned at the sound of his voice. Why did she not step forward to greet him, if indeed she were Lily? She was, she was Lily: the other pierrette had turned to see what she was going to do.</p>
				<p>“I say, how on earth did you recognize me?” Lily murmured, raising her mask and looking at Michael with her smile that was so debonair and tender, so scornful and so passionate.</p>
				<p>“I saw you in November coming out of the Orient. I tried to get across the road to speak to you, but you’d gone before I could manage it. Where have you been all these years? Once I went to Trelawny Road, but the house was empty.” He could not tell her that Drake had been the first to bring him news of her.</p>
				<p>“It’s years since I was there,” said Lily. “Years and years.” She turned to call her friend, and the pierrette with the rose pompons came closer to be introduced.</p>
				<p>“Miss Sylvia Scarlett: <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Michael Fane. Aren’t I good to remember your name quite correctly?” Michael thought that her mouth for a moment was utterly scornful. “What made you come here? Have you got a friend with you?”</p>
				<p>Michael explained that he was alone, and that his visit here was an accident.</p>
				<p>“Why did <em>you</em> come?” he asked.</p>
				<p>“Oh, something to do,” said Lily. “We live near here.”</p>
				<p>“So do I,” said Michael hastily.</p>
				<p>“Do you?” Her eyebrows went up in what he imagined was an expression of rather cruel interrogation. “This is a silly sort of a show. Still, even Covent Garden is dull now.”</p>
				<p>Michael thought what a fool he had been not to include Covent Garden in his search. How well he might have known she would go there.</p>
				<p>“Where’s Doris?” he asked.</p>
				<p>Lily shrugged her shoulders.</p>
				<p>“I never see anything of her nowadays. She married an actor. I don’t often get letters from home, do I, Sylvia?”</p>
				<p>The pierrette with rose pompons, who ever since her introduction had still been standing outside the conversation, now raised her mask. Michael liked her face. She had merry eyes, and a wide nose rather Slavonic. Next to Lily she seemed almost dumpy.</p>
				<p>“Letters, my dear,” she exclaimed, in a very deep voice, “Who wants letters?”</p>
				<p>The music of a waltz was beginning, and Michael asked Lily if she would dance with him. She looked at Sylvia.</p>
				<p>“I don’t think. …”</p>
				<p>“Oh, what rot, Lily! Of course you can dance.”</p>
				<p>Michael gave her a grateful smile.</p>
				<p>In a moment Lily had lowered her mask, and they were waltzing together.</p>
				<p>“My gad, how gloriously you waltz!” he whispered. “Did we ever dance together five years ago?”</p>
				<p>She shrugged her shoulders, and he felt the faint movement tremble through the imponderable form he held.</p>
				<p>“Lily, I’ve been looking for you since June,” he sighed.</p>
				<p>“You’re breaking step,” she said. Though her mask was down, Michael was sure that she was frowning at him.</p>
				<p>“Lily, why are you so cold with me? Have you forgotten?”</p>
				<p>“What?”</p>
				<p>“Why, everything!” Michael gasped.</p>
				<p>“You’re absolutely out of time now,” she said sternly.</p>
				<p>They waltzed for a while in silence, and Michael felt like a midge spinning upon a dazzle.</p>
				<p>“Do you remember when we met in Kensington Gardens?” he ventured. “I remember you had black pompons on your shoes then, and now you have pale blue pompons on your dress.”</p>
				<p>She was not answering him.</p>
				<p>“It’s funny you should still be living near me,” he went on. “I suppose you’re angry with me because I suddenly never saw you again. That was partly your mother’s fault.”</p>
				<p>She looked at him in faint perplexity, swaying to the melody of the waltz. Michael thought he had blundered in betraying himself as so obviously lovestruck now. He must be seeming to her like that absurd and sentimental boy of five years ago. Perhaps she was despising him, for she could compare him with other men. Ejaculations of wonder at her beauty would no longer serve, with all the experience she might bring to mock them. She was smiling at him now, and the mask she wore made the smile seem a sneer. He grew so angry with her suddenly that almost he stopped in the swing of the dance to shake her.</p>
				<p>“But it was much more your fault,” he said savagely. “Do you remember Drake?”</p>
				<p>She shook her head; then she corrected herself.</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes. Arthur Drake who lived next door to us.”</p>
				<p>“Well, I saw you in the garden from his window. You were being kissed by some terrible bounder. That was jolly for me. Why did you do that? Couldn’t you say ‘no’? Were you too lazy?”</p>
				<p>Michael thought she moved closer to him as they danced.</p>
				<p>“Answer me, will you; answer me, I say. Were you too lazy to resist, or did you enjoy being cheapened by that insufferable brute you were flirting with?”</p>
				<p>Michael in his rage of remembrance twisted her hand. But she made no gesture, nor uttered any sound of pain. Instead she sank closer to his arms, and as the dance rolled on, he told himself triumphantly that, while she was with him, she was his again.</p>
				<p>What did the past matter?</p>
				<p>“Ah, Lily, you love me still! I’ll ask no more questions. Am I out of step?”</p>
				<p>“No, not now,” she whispered, and he saw that her face was pale with the swoon of their dancing.</p>
				<p>“Take off that silly mask,” he commanded. “Take it off and give it to me. I can hold you with one arm.”</p>
				<p>She obeyed him, and with a tremendous exultation he swung her round, as if indeed he were carrying her to the edge of the world. The mask no longer veiled her face; her eyelids drooped, clouding her eyes; her lips were parted: she was now dead white. Michael crooked her left arm until he could touch her shoulder.</p>
				<p>“Look at me. Look at me. The dance will soon be over.”</p>
				<p>She opened her eyes, and into their depths of dusky blue he danced and danced until, waking with the end of the music, he found himself and Lily close to Sylvia Scarlett, who was laughing at them where she stood in the corner of the room under a canopy of holly.</p>
				<p>Lily was for the rest of the evening herself as Michael had always known her. She had always been superficially indifferent to anything that was happening round her, and she behaved at this carnival as if it were a street full of dull people among whom by chance she was walking. Nor with her companions was she much more alert, though when she danced with Michael her indifference became a passionate languor. Soon after midnight both the girls declared they were tired of the Redcliffe Hall, and they asked Michael to escort them home. He was going to fetch a cab, but they stopped him, saying that Tinderbox Lane, where they lived, was only a little way along on the other side of the Fulham Road. The fog was very dense when they came out, and Michael took the girls’ arms with a delicious sense of intimacy, with a feeling, too, of extraordinary freedom from the world, as if they were all three embarked upon an adventure in this eclipse of fog. He had packed their shoes deep down in the pockets of his overcoat, and with the possession of their shoes he had a sensation of possessing the wearers of them. The fog was denser and denser: they paused upon the edge of the curb, listening for oncoming traffic. A distant omnibus was lumbering far down the Fulham Road. Michael caught their arms close, and the three of them seemed to sail across to the opposite pavement. He had nothing to say because he was so happy, and Lily had nothing to say because she talked now no more than she used to talk. So it was Sylvia who had to carry on the conversation, and since most of this consisted of questions to Lily and Michael about their former friendship, which neither Lily nor Michael answered, even Sylvia was discouraged at last; and they walked on silently through the fog, Michael clasping the girls close to him and watching all the time Lily’s hand holding up her big black cloak.</p>
				<p>“Here we are, you two dreamers,” said Sylvia, pulling them to a stop by a narrow turning which led straight from the pavement unexpectedly, without any dip down into a road.</p>
				<p>“Through here? How fascinating!” said Michael.</p>
				<p>They passed between two posts, and in another three minutes stopped in front of a door set in a wall.</p>
				<p>“I’ve got the key,” said Sylvia, and she unlocked the door.</p>
				<p>“But this is extraordinary,” Michael exclaimed. “Aren’t we walking through a garden?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, it’s quite a long garden,” Sylvia informed him. There was a smell of damp earth here that sweetened the harshness of the fog, and Michael thought that he had never imagined anything so romantic as following Lily in single file along the narrow gravel path of a mysterious garden like this. There must have been thirty yards of path, before they walked up the steps of what seemed to be a sort of balcony.</p>
				<p>“She’s downstairs,” said Sylvia, tapping upon a glass door with the key. A woman’s figure appeared with an orange-shaded lamp in the passage.</p>
				<p>“Open quickly, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough. We’re frozen,” Sylvia called. As the woman opened the door, Sylvia went on in her deep voice:</p>
				<p>“We’ve brought an old friend of Lily’s back from the dance. It wasn’t really worth going to. Oh, I oughtn’t to have said that, ought I?” she laughed, turning round to Michael. “Come in and get warm. This is <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough, who’s the queen of cards.”</p>
				<p>“Get along with you, you great saucy thing,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough, laughing.</p>
				<p>She was a woman of enormous size with a triplication of chins. Her crimson cheeks shone with the same glister as her black dress; and her black hair, so black that it must have been dyed, was parted in the middle and lay in a chignon upon her neck. She seemed all the larger, sitting in this small room full of Victorian finery, and Michael was amused to hear her address Sylvia as “great.”</p>
				<p>“We want something to eat and something to drink, you lovely old mountain,” Sylvia said.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough doubled herself up and smacked her knees in a tempest of wheezy laughter.</p>
				<p>“Sit here, you terrors, while I get the cloth on the dining-room table,” and out she went, her laughter dying in sibilations along the diminutive corridor. Lily had flung herself down in an armchair near the fire. Behind her stood a small mahogany table on which was a glass case of hummingbirds; by her elbow on the wall was a white china bell coronated with a filigree of gilt, and by chance the antimacassar on the chair was of Berlin wool checkered black and blue. She in her pierrette’s dress of black with light blue pompons looked strangely remote from present time in that setting. Michael could not connect this secluded house with anything which had made an impression upon him during his experience of the underworld. Here was nothing that was not cozy and old-fashioned; here was no sign of decay, whether in the fabric of the house or in the attitude of the people living there. This small square room with the heavy furniture that occupied so much of the space had no demirep demeanor. That horsehair sofa with lyre-shaped sides and back of floriated wood; that brass birdcage hanging in the window against the curtains of maroon serge; those cabinets in miniature, some lacquered, some of plain wood with tiny drop-handles of brass; those black chairs with seats of gilded cane; those trays with marquetery in mother-of-pearl of wreaths and rivulets and parrots; that tablecloth like a dish of black Sèvres; those simpering steel engravings⁠—there was nothing that did not bespeak the sobriety of the Victorian prime here miraculously preserved. Lily and Sylvia in such dresses belonged to a period of fantasy; <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough was in keeping with her furniture; and Michael, as he looked at himself in the glass overmantel, did not think that he was seeming very intrusive.</p>
				<p>“Whose are these rooms?” he asked. Lily was adorable, but he did not believe they were her creation or discovery.</p>
				<p>“I found them,” said Sylvia. “The old girl who owns the house is bad, but beautiful. Aren’t you, you most astonishing but attractive mammoth?” This was addressed to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough, who was at the moment panting into the room for some accessory to the dining-table.</p>
				<p>“Get along with you,” the landlady chuckled. “Now don’t go to sleep, Lily. Your supper is just on ready.” She went puffing from the room in busy mirthfulness.</p>
				<p>“She’s one of the best,” said Sylvia. “This house was given to her by an old General who died about two years ago. You can see the painting of him up in her bedroom as a daredevil hussar with drooping whiskers. She was a gay contemporary of the Albert Memorial. You know. Argyle Rooms and Cremorne. With the Haymarket as the center of naughtiness.”</p>
				<p>It was funny, Michael thought, that his tobacconist should have mentioned Cremorne only this afternoon. That he had done so affected him more sharply now with a sense of the appropriateness of this house in Tinderbox Lane. Appropriateness to what? Perhaps merely to the mood of this foggy night.</p>
				<p>“Supper! Supper!” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough was crying.</p>
				<p>It was dismaying for Michael to think that he had not kissed Lily yet, and he wished that Sylvia would hurry ahead into the other room and give him an opportunity. He wanted to pull her gently from that chair, up from that chair into his arms. But Sylvia was the one who did so, and she kissed Lily half fiercely, leaving Michael disconsolately to follow them across the passage.</p>
				<p>It was jolly to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough sitting at the head of the table with the orange-shaded lamp throwing warm rays upon her countenance. That it was near the chilly hour of one, with a cold thick fog outside, was inconceivable when he looked at that cheery great porpoise of a woman unscrewing bottles of India Pale Ale.</p>
				<p>Michael did not want the questions about him and Lily to begin again. So he turned the conversation upon a more remote past.</p>
				<p>“Oh, my eye, my eye!” laughed Sylvia. “To think that Aunt Enormous was once in the ballet at the Opera.”</p>
				<p>“How dare you laugh at me? Whoof!” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough gave a sort of muffled bark as her arm pounced out to grab Sylvia. The two of them frisked with each other absurdly, while Lily sat with wide-open blue eyes, so graceful even in that stiff chair close up to the table, that Michael was in an ecstasy of admiration, and marveled gratefully at the New Year’s Day which could so change his fortune.</p>
				<p>“Were you in the ballet?” he asked.</p>
				<p>“Certainly I was, though this great teazing thing beside me would like to make out that when I was eighteen I looked just as I do now.”</p>
				<p>“Show the kind gentleman your picture,” said Sylvia. “She wears it round her neck in a locket, the vain old mountebank.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough opened a gold locket, and Michael looked at a rosy young woman in a porkpie hat.</p>
				<p>“That’s myself,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough sentimentally. “Well, and I always loved being young better than anything or anybody, so why shouldn’t I wear next my own heart myself as I used to be?”</p>
				<p>“But show him the others,” Sylvia demanded.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough fetched from a desk two daguerreotypes in stained morocco cases lined with faded piece velvet. By tilting their surfaces against the light could be seen the shadow of a portrait’s wraith: a girl appearing in pantalettes and tartan frock; a ballerina glimmering, with points of faint celeste for eyes, and for cheeks the evanescence of a ghostly bloom.</p>
				<p>“Oh, look at her,” cried Sylvia. “In her beautiful pantalettes!”</p>
				<p>“Hold your tongue, you!”</p>
				<p>They started again with their sparring and mock encounters, which lasted on and off until supper was over. Then they all went back to the other room and sat round the fire.</p>
				<p>“Tell us about the General,” said Sylvia.</p>
				<p>“Go on, as if you hadn’t heard a score of times all I’ve got to tell about the General⁠—though you know I hate him to be called that. He’ll always be the Captain to me.”</p>
				<p>Soon afterward, notwithstanding her first refusal, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough embarked upon tales of gay days in the ’sixties and ’seventies. It was astonishing to think that this room in which they were sitting could scarcely have changed since then.</p>
				<p>“The dear Captain! He bought this house for me in eighteen-sixty-nine before I was twenty, and I’ve lived in it ever since. Ah, dear! many’s the summer daybreak we’ve walked back here after dancing all night at Cremorne. Such lovely lights and fireworks. Earl’s Court is nothing to Cremorne. Fancy their pulling it down as they did. But perhaps it’s as well it went, as all the old faces have gone. It would have given me the dismals to be going there now without my Captain.”</p>
				<p>She went on with old tales of London, tales that had in them the very smoke and grime of the city.</p>
				<p>“Who knows what’s going to happen when the clock strikes twelve?” she said, shaking her head. “So enjoy yourselves while you can. That’s my motto. And if there’s a hereafter, which good God forbid, I should be very aggravated to find myself waltzing around as fat and funny as I am now.”</p>
				<p>The old pagan, who had mellowed slowly with her house for company, seemed to sit here hugging the old friend; and as she told her tales it was difficult not to think she was playing hostess to the spirits of her youths to ghostly Dundrearies and spectral belles with oval faces. Michael could have listened all night to her reminiscences of dead singers and dead dancers, of gay women become dust and of rakes reformed, of beauties that were now hags, and of handsome young subalterns grown parched and liverish. Sylvia egged her on from story to story, and Lily lay languidly back in her chair. It must be after two o’clock, and Michael rose to go.</p>
				<p>“We’ll have one song,” cried Sylvia, and she pulled <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough to the piano. The top of the instrument was hidden by stacked-up albums, and the front of it was of fretted walnut-wood across a pleating of claret-colored silk.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough, pounding with her fat fingers the keys that seemed in comparison so frail and old, sang in a wheezy pipe of a voice: “The Captain with his Whiskers took a Sly Glance at Me.”</p>
				<p>“But you only get me to do it, so as you can have a good laugh at me behind my back,” she declared, swinging round upon the stool to face Sylvia when she had finished.</p>
				<p>“Nothing of the sort, you fat old darling. We do it because we like it.”</p>
				<p>“Bless your heart, my dearie.” She laid a hand on Sylvia’s for an instant. Michael thanked <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough for the entertainment, and asked Sylvia if she thought he might come round tomorrow and take Lily and her out to lunch.</p>
				<p>“We can lunch tomorrow, can’t we?” Sylvia asked, tugging at Lily’s arm, for she was now fast asleep.</p>
				<p>“Is Michael going? Yes, we can lunch with him tomorrow,” Lily yawned.</p>
				<p>He promised to call for them about midday. It seemed ridiculous to shake hands so formally with Lily, and he hoped she would suggest that the outside door was difficult to open. Alas, it was Sylvia who came to speed his departure.</p>
				<p>The fog was welcome to Michael for his going home. At this hour of the night there was not a sound of anything, and he could walk on, dreaming undisturbed. He supposed he would arrive ultimately at Cheyne Walk. But he did not care. He would have been content to fill the long winter night with his fancies. Plunging his hands down into the pockets of his overcoat, he discovered that he had forgotten to take out the girls’ shoes, and what company they were through the gloom! It was a most fascinating experience, to wander along holding these silky slippers which had twinkled through the evening of this night. Not a cab-horse blew a frosty breath by the curb; not a policeman loomed; nor passerby nor cat offended his isolation. The London night belonged to him; his only were the footsteps echoing back from the invisible houses on either side; and the golden room in Tinderbox Lane was never more than a few yards in front.</p>
				<p>He had found Lily at last, and he held her shoes for a token of his good luck. Let no one tell him again that destiny was a fable. Nothing was ever more deliberately foredoomed than the meeting at that carnival. Michael was so grateful to his tobacconist that he determined to buy all sorts of extravagant pipes and cigarette holders he had fingered vaguely from time to time in the shop. For a while Lily’s discovery was colored with such a glamour that Michael did not analyze the situation in which he had found her. Walking back to Chelsea through the fog, he was bemused by the romantic memory of her which was traveling along with his thoughts. He could hold very tightly her shoes: he could almost embrace the phantom of her beauty that curled upon the vapors round each lamp: he was intoxicated merely by the sound of the street where she lived.</p>
				<p>“Tinderbox Lane! Tinderbox Lane! Tinderbox Lane!”</p>
				<p>He sang it in triumph, remembering how only this morning he had sighed to himself, as he chased the telegraph-wires up and down the window of the railway-carriage: “Where is she? Where is she? Where is she?”</p>
				<p>“Tinderbox Lane! Tinderbox Lane! Tinderbox Lane!” he chanted at the fog, and, throwing a slipper into the air, he caught it and ran on ridiculously until he bumped into a policeman standing by the corner.</p>
				<p>“I’m awfully sorry, constable.”</p>
				<p>“Feeling a bit happy, sir, aren’t you?”</p>
				<p>“Frightfully happy. I say, by the by, happy new year, constable. Drink my health when you’re off duty.”</p>
				<p>He pressed half-a-crown into the policeman’s hand, and as he left the stolid form behind him in the fog, he remembered that half-a-crown was the weekly blackmail paid by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith of Leppard Street. He was on the Embankment now, and the fog had lifted so that he saw the black river flowing sullenly through the night. The plane-trees dripped with monotonous beads of dankness. The fog was become a mist here, a frore whitish mist that saturated him with a malignant chill. Michael was glad to find himself looking at the dolphin-headed knocker of 173 Cheyne Walk. The effect of being in his own bedroom again, even though the girls’ shoes lay fantastically upon the floor, was at first to make him believe that Tinderbox Lane might have been a dream, and after that, because he knew it was not a dream, to wonder about it.</p>
				<p>Yet not even now in this austere and icy bedroom of his own could Michael feel that there was anything really wrong about that small house. It still preserved for him an illusion of sobriety and stability, almost of primness, yet of being rich with a demure gaiety. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough, however, was scarcely a chaperone. Nor was she very demure. And who was Sylvia? And what was Lily doing there? It would have been mysterious, that household, in any case, but was it necessary to assume that there was anything wrong? Sylvia was obviously a girl of high spirits. He had asked her no questions about herself. She might be on the stage. For fun, or perhaps because of their landlady’s kindling stories, Sylvia might have persuaded Lily to come once or twice to the Orient. It did not follow that there was anything wrong. There had been nothing wrong in that carnival. Michael’s heart leaped with the fancy that he was not too late. That would indeed crown this romantic night; and, picking up Lily’s shoe, he held it for a while, wondering about its secrets.</p>
				<p>In the morning the fog had turned to a drench of dull January rain; but Michael greeted the outlook as cheerfully as if it had been perfect May weather. He went first to a post office to send off the money he had promised to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Smith and the Solutionist. After this discharge of business, he felt more cheerful than ever, and, as if to capture the final touch of fantasy necessary to bewitch yesterday night, he suddenly realized, when he was hurrying along Fulham Road in the rain, that he had no idea of the number of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough’s house. He also began to wonder if there really could be such a place as Tinderbox Lane, and as he walked on without discovering any indication of its existence, he wondered if Sylvia had invented the name, so that he might never find her and Lily again. It was an uneasy thought, for without a number and without a name⁠—but just as he was planning an elaborate way to discover the real name of the street, he saw in front of him Tinderbox Lane enameled in the ordinary characters of municipal direction. Here were the two posts: here was the narrow entrance. The rumble of the traffic grew fainter. On one side was a high blank wall; on the other a row of two-storied houses. They were naturally dwellings of the poorer classes, but at intervals a painter had acquired one, and had painted it white or affixed green shutters with heart-shaped openings. The width of the pavement varied continually, but generally at the beginning it was very narrow. Later on, however, it became wide enough to allow trees to be planted down the middle. Beyond this part was a block of new flats round which Tinderbox Lane narrowed again to a mere alley looking now rather dank and gloomy in the rain. Michael could not remember from last night in the fog either the trees or the flats. The door of Lily’s lodging had been set in a wall: here on one side was certainly a wall, but never a door to relieve the grimy blankness. He began to feel discouraged, and he walked round into the narrow alley behind the flats. Here were doors in the wall at last, and Michael examined each of them in turn. Two were dark blue: one was green: one was brown. 74: 75: 76: 77. He chose 77 because it was farthest away from the flats. After a very long wait, an old woman holding over herself a very large umbrella opened it.</p>
				<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough … ?” Michael began.</p>
				<p>But the old woman had slammed the door before he could finish his inquiry.</p>
				<p>Michael rang the bell of 76, and again he waited a long time. At last the door was opened, and to his relief he saw <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough herself under a green and much larger umbrella than the old woman’s next door.</p>
				<p>“I’ve come to take the girls out to lunch.”</p>
				<p>“That’s a good boy,” she wheezed. “The dearies will be glad to get out and enjoy themselves a bit. Here’s a day. This would have suited Noah, wouldn’t it?”</p>
				<p>She was leading the way up the gravel path, and Michael saw that in the garden-beds there were actually Christmas roses in bloom. The house itself was covered with a mat of Virginia creeper and jasmine, and the astonishing rusticity of it was not at all diminished by the pretentious gray houses of the next road which towered above it behind, nor even in front by the flats with their eruption of windows. These houses with doors in their garden-walls probably all belonged to individuals, and for that reason they had escaped being overwhelmed by the development of the neighborhood twenty years ago. Their four long gardens in a row must be a bower of greenery in summer, and it was sad to think that the flats opposite were no doubt due to the death of someone who had owned a similar house and garden.</p>
				<p>Michael remembered the balcony in front with steps on either side. Underneath this he now saw that there was another entrance, evidently to the kitchen. Two fairly large trees were planted in the grass that ran up to the house on either side of the balcony.</p>
				<p>“Those are my mulberries,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough. “This is called Mulberry Cottage. I’ve been meaning to have the name painted on the outside door for nearly forty years, but I always forget. There’s a character to give myself. Ah, dear me! The Captain loved his mulberries. But you ought to see this in the springtime. Well, my flowers are really remarkable. But there, it’s not to be wondered at. M’ father was a nursery gardener.”</p>
				<p>She looked round at Michael and winked broadly. He could not think why. Possibly it was a comic association in her mind with the behavior of the Captain in carrying her off from such a home.</p>
				<p>“The Duke of Fulham to see you, girls,” she wheezed at the door of the sitting-room, and, giving Michael a push, retreated with volleys of bronchial laughter. The girls were sitting in front of the fire. Lily was pretending to trim a hat: Sylvia was reading, but she flung her book down as Michael entered. He had the curiosity to look at the title, and found it was the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Contes Drôlatiques</i> of Balzac. An unusual girl, he thought: but his eyes were all for Lily, and because he could not kiss her, he felt shy and stupid. However, the shoes, which he now restored, supplied an immediate topic, and he was soon perfectly at ease again. Presently the girls left him to get ready to go out, and he sat thinking of Lily, while the canary chirped in the brass cage. The silence here was very like the country. London was a thousand miles away, and he could hear Lily and Sylvia moving about overhead. Less and less did he think there could be anything wrong with Mulberry Cottage. Yet the apparent security was going to make it rather difficult to take Lily away. Certainly he could ask her to marry him at once; but she might not want to marry him at once. The discovery of her in this pleasant house with a jolly friend was spoiling the grand swoop of rescue which he had planned. She would not presumably be escaping from a situation she abhorred. It was difficult to approach Lily here. Was it Sylvia who was making it difficult? He must talk to Sylvia and explain that he had no predatory intentions. She would surely be glad that he wanted to marry Lily. Or would she not? Michael jumped up and tinkled the lusters on the mantelshelf. “Sweet,” said the canary in the brass cage: the rain sizzled without. Faintly pervading this small square room was the malaise of someone’s jealousy. The tentative solution that was propounding itself did not come from his own impression of Sylvia, but it seemed positively to be an emanation from the four walls of the room which in the stillness was able to force its reality upon him. “Sweet,” said the canary: the lusters stopped their tinkling: the rain sizzled steadily outside.</p>
				<p>Lunch at Kettner’s was a great success. At least Michael thought it was a great success, because Lily looked exquisite against the bronzy walls, and her hair on this dull day seemed not to lack sunlight, but rather to give to the atmosphere a thought of the sun, the rare and wintry sun. Sylvia talked a great deal in her deep voice, and he was conscious that the other people in the restaurant were turning round to envy their table.</p>
				<p>The longer that Michael was in the company of Lily and Sylvia, the less he was able to ask the direct questions that would have been comparatively easy at the beginning. Sylvia, by the capacity she displayed of appreciating worldliness without ever appearing worldly herself, made it impossible for him to risk her contempt by a stupid question. She was not on the stage; so much he had discovered. She and Lily had apparently a number of men friends. That fact would have been disquieting, but that Sylvia talked of them with such a really tomboyish zest as made it impossible to suppose they represented more than what they were superficially, the companions of jolly days on the river and at race-meetings, of jolly evenings at theaters and balls. Quite definitely Michael was able to assure himself that out of the host of allusions there was not one which pointed to any man favored above the rest. He was able to be positive that Lily and Sylvia were independent. Yet Lily had no private allowance or means. It must be Sylvia who was helping her. Perhaps Sylvia was always strict, and perhaps all these friends were by her held at arm’s length from Lily, as he felt himself being held now. Her attitude might have nothing to do with jealousy. But Sylvia was not strict in her conversation; she was, indeed, exceptionally free. That might be a good sign. A girl who read the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Contes Drôlatiques</i> might easily read Rabelais himself, and a girl who read Rabelais would be inviolable. Michael, when Sylvia had said something particularly broad, used to look away from Lily; and yet he knew he need not have bothered, for Lily was always outside the conversation; always under a spell of silence and remoteness. Of what was she forever thinking? There were looking-glasses upon the bronzy walls.</p>
				<p>For a fortnight Michael came every day to Tinderbox Lane and took the girls out; but for the whole of that fortnight he never managed to be alone with Lily. Then one day Sylvia was not there when he called. To find Lily like this after a tantalizing fortnight was like being in a room heavily perfumed with flowers. It seemed to stifle his initiative, so that for a few minutes he sat coldly and awkwardly by the window.</p>
				<p>“We’re alone,” he managed to say at last.</p>
				<p>“Sylvia’s gone to Brighton. She didn’t want to go a bit.”</p>
				<p>“Bother Sylvia! Lily, we haven’t kissed for five years.”</p>
				<p>He stumbled across to take her in his arms; and as he held her to him, it was a rose falling to pieces, so did she melt upon his passion. He heard her sigh; a coal slipped in the grate; the canary hopped from perch to perch. These small sounds but wrapped him more closely in the trance of silence.</p>
				<p>“Lily, you will marry me, won’t you? Very soon? At once?”</p>
				<p>Michael was kneeling beside her chair, and she was looking down at him from clouded eyes still passionate. Marriage was an intrusion upon the remoteness where they brooded; and he, ravished by their flamy blue relucency, could not care whether she answered him or not. This was such a contentment of desire that the future with the visible shapes of action it tried to display was unheeded, while now she stirred in his arms. She was his, and so for an hour she stayed, immortal, and yet most poignantly the prisoner of time. Michael, with all that he had dreaded at the back of his mind he would have to face in her condition, scarcely knew how to celebrate this reward of his tenacity. This tranquillity of caresses, this slow fondling of her wrist were a lullaby to his fears. It was the very rhapsody of his intention to kneel beside her, murmuring huskily the little words of love. He would have married her wherever and whatever he found her, but the relief was overwhelming. He had thought of a beautiful thing ruined; he had foreshadowed glooms and tragic colloquies; he had desperately hoped his devotion might be granted at least the virtue of a balm. Instead, he found this ivory girl, this loveliness of rose and coral within his arms. So many times she had eluded him in dreams upon the midway of the night, and so often in dreams he had held her for kisses that were robbed from him by the sunlight of the morning, that he scarcely could believe he held her now, now when her hair was thistledown upon his cheeks, when her mouth was a butterfly. He shuddered to think how soon this airy beauty must have perished; and even now what was she? A shred of goldleaf on his open hand, pliant, but fugitive at a breath, and destructible in a moment of adversity.</p>
				<p>Always in their youth, when they had sat imparadised, Michael had been aware of the vulgar Haden household in the background. Now, here she was placed in exactly the room where he would have wished to find her, though he would scarcely desire to maintain her in such a setting. He could picture her at not so distant a time in wonderful rooms, about whose slim furniture she would move in delicate and languorous promenades. This room pleased him, because it was the one from which he would have wished to take her into the misty grandeurs he imagined for her lodging. It was a room he would always regard with affection, thinking of the canary in the brass cage and the Christmas roses blowing in the garden and the low sounds of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough busy in her kitchen underneath. Tinderbox Lane! It was an epithalamium in itself; and as for Mulberry Cottage, it had been carried here by the fat pink loves painted on the ceiling of that Cremorne arbor in which the Captain had first imagined his gift.</p>
				<p>So with fantastic thoughts and perfect kisses, perfect but yet ineffably vain because they expressed so little of what Michael would have had them express, the hour passed.</p>
				<p>“We must talk of practical things,” he declared, rising from his knees.</p>
				<p>“You always want to talk,” Lily pouted.</p>
				<p>“I want to marry you. Do you want to marry me?”</p>
				<p>“Yes; but it’s so difficult to do things quickly.”</p>
				<p>“We’ll be married in a month. We’ll be married on Saint Valentine’s Day,” Michael announced.</p>
				<p>“It’s so wet now to think of weddings.” She looked peevishly out of the window.</p>
				<p>“You haven’t got to think about it. You’ve got to do it.”</p>
				<p>“And it’s so dull,” she objected. “Sylvia says it’s appallingly dull. And she’s been married.”</p>
				<p>“What has Sylvia got to do with it?” he demanded.</p>
				<p>“Oh, well, she’s been awfully sweet to me. And after all, when mother died, what was I to do? I couldn’t bear Doris any more. She always gets on my nerves. Anyway, don’t let’s talk about marriage now. In the summer I shall feel more cheerful. I hate this weather.”</p>
				<p>“But look here,” he persisted. “Are you in love with me?”</p>
				<p>She nodded, yet too doubtfully to please him.</p>
				<p>“Well, if you’re not in love with me. …”</p>
				<p>“Oh, I am, I am! Don’t shout so, Michael. If I wasn’t awfully fond of you, I shouldn’t have made Sylvia ask you to come back. She hates men coming here.”</p>
				<p>“Are you Sylvia’s servant?” said Michael, in exasperation.</p>
				<p>“Don’t be stupid. Of course not.”</p>
				<p>“It’s ridiculous,” he grumbled, “to quote her with every sentence.”</p>
				<p>“Why you couldn’t have stayed where you were,” said Lily fretfully, “I don’t know. It was lovely sitting by the fire and being kissed. If you’re so much in love with me, I wonder you wanted to get up.”</p>
				<p>“So, we’re not to talk any more about marriage?”</p>
				<p>After all, he told himself, it was unreasonable of him to suppose that Lily was likely to be as impulsive as himself. Her temperament was not the same. She did not mean to discourage him.</p>
				<p>“Don’t let’s talk about anything,” said Lily. He could not stand aloof from the arms she held wide open.</p>
				<p>Sylvia would not be coming back for at least three days, and Michael spent all his time with Lily. He thought that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough looked approvingly upon their love; at any rate, she never worried them. The weather was steadily unpleasant, and though he took Lily out to lunch, it never seemed worth while to stay away from Tinderbox Lane very long. One night, however, they went to the Palace, and afterward, when he asked her where she would like to go, she suggested Verrey’s. Michael had never been there before, and he was rather jealous that Lily should seem to know it so well. However, he liked to see her sitting in what he told himself was the only café in London which had escaped the cheapening of popularity and had kept its old air of the Third Empire.</p>
				<p>As Lily was stirring her lemon-squash, her languid forearm looked very white swaying from the somber mufflings of her cloak. Something in her self-possession, a momentary hardness and disdain, made Michael suddenly suspicious.</p>
				<p>“Do you enjoy Covent Garden balls?” he asked.</p>
				<p>She shrugged her shoulders.</p>
				<p>“It depends who we go with. Often I don’t care for them much. And the girls you see there are frightfully common.”</p>
				<p>He could not bring himself to ask her straight out what he feared. If it were so, let it rest unrevealed. The knowledge would make no difference to his resolution. People began to come into the café, shaking the wet from their shoulders; and the noise of the rain was audible above the conversation.</p>
				<p>“I wish we could have had one fine day together,” said Michael regretfully. “Do you remember when we used to go for long walks in the winter?”</p>
				<p>“I must have been very fond of you,” Lily laughed. “I don’t think you could make me walk like that now.”</p>
				<p>“Aren’t you so fond of me now?” he asked reproachfully.</p>
				<p>“You ought to know,” she whispered.</p>
				<p>All the way home the raindrops were flashing in the road like bayonets, and her cheeks were dabbled with the wet.</p>
				<p>“Shall I come in?” Michael asked, as he waited by the door in the wall.</p>
				<p>“Yes, come in and have something to drink, of course.”</p>
				<p>He was stabbed by the ease of her invitation.</p>
				<p>“Do you ask all these friends of yours to come in and have a drink after midnight?”</p>
				<p>“I told you that Sylvia doesn’t like me to,” she said.</p>
				<p>“But you would, if she didn’t mind?” Michael went on, torturing himself.</p>
				<p>“How fond you are of ‘ifs,’ ” she answered. “I can’t bother to think about ‘ifs’ myself.”</p>
				<p>If only he had the pluck to avoid allusions and come at once to grips with truth. Sharply he advised himself to let the truth alone. Already he was feeling the influence of Lily’s attitude. He wondered if, when he married her, all his activity would swoon upon Calypso like this. It was as easy to dream life away in the contemplation of a beautiful woman as in the meditation of the Oxford landscape.</p>
				<p>“Happiness makes me inactive,” said Michael to himself. “So of course I shall never really be happy. What a paradox.”</p>
				<p>He would not take off his overcoat. He was feeling afraid of a surrender tonight.</p>
				<p>“I’m glad I didn’t suggest staying late,” he thought, as he walked away down the dripping garden path. “I should have been mad with unreasonable suspicions, if she had said ‘yes.’ ”</p>
				<p>Sylvia came back next day, and though Michael still liked her very much, he was certain now of her hostility to him. He was conscious of malice in the air, when she said to Lily that Jack wanted them to have dinner with him tonight and go afterward to some dance at Richmond. Michael was furious that Lily should be invited to Richmond, and yet until she had promised to marry him how could he combat Sylvia’s influence? And who was Jack? And with whom had Sylvia been to Brighton?</p>
				<p>The day after the dance, Michael came round about twelve o’clock as usual, but when he reached the sitting-room only Sylvia was before the fire.</p>
				<p>“Lily isn’t down yet,” she told him.</p>
				<p>He was aware of a breathlessness in the atmosphere, and he knew that he and Sylvia were shortly going to clash.</p>
				<p>“Jolly dance?” he asked.</p>
				<p>She shrugged her shoulders, and there was a long pause.</p>
				<p>“Will Lily be dressed soon? I rather want to take her out.” Michael flung down his challenge.</p>
				<p>“She’s been talking to me about what you said yesterday,” Sylvia began.</p>
				<p>Michael could not help liking her more and more, although her countenance was set against him. He could not help admiring that out-thrust underlip and those wide-set, deep and bitter brown eyes.</p>
				<p>“When do you propose to marry her?” Sylvia went on.</p>
				<p>“As soon as possible,” he said coolly.</p>
				<p>“Which of us do you think has the greater influence over her?” she demanded.</p>
				<p>“I really don’t know. You have rather an advantage over me in that respect.”</p>
				<p>“I’m glad you admit that,” interrupted Sylvia, with sarcastic chill.</p>
				<p>“You have personality. You’ve probably been very kind to Lily. You’re cleverer than she is. You’re with her all the time. I’ve only quite suddenly come into her life again.”</p>
				<p>“I’m glad you think you’ve managed to do that,” she said, glowering.</p>
				<p>More and more, Michael thought, with her wide-set eyes was she like a cat crouching by the fire.</p>
				<p>“Just because I had to go away for three days and you had an opportunity to be alone with Lily, you now think you’ve come into her life. My god, you’re like some damned fool in a novel!”</p>
				<p>“A novel by whom?” Michael asked. Partly he was trying to score off Sylvia, but at the same time he was sincerely curious to know, for he never could resist the amplification of a comparison.</p>
				<p>“Oh, any ink-slinger with a brain of pulp,” she answered savagely.</p>
				<p>He bowed.</p>
				<p>“I suppose you’re suffering from the virus of sentimental redemption?” she sneered.</p>
				<p>Michael was rather startled by her divination.</p>
				<p>“What should I redeem her from?”</p>
				<p>“I thought you boasted of knowing Lily six years ago?”</p>
				<p>“I don’t know that I boasted of it,” he replied, in rather an injured tone. “But I did know her⁠—very well.”</p>
				<p>“Couldn’t you foresee what she was bound to become? Personally I should have said that Lily’s future must have been obvious from the time she was five years old. Certainly at seventeen it must have been. You got out of her life then: what the hell’s your object in coming into it again now, as you call it, unless you’re a sentimentalist? People don’t let passion lapse for six years and pick up the broken thread without the help of sentiment.”</p>
				<p>Michael in the middle of the increasing tension of the conversation was able to stop for a moment and ask himself if this by chance were true. He was standing by the mantelpiece and tinkling the lusters. Sylvia looked up at him irritably, and he silenced them at once.</p>
				<p>“Sentiment about what?” he asked, taking the chair opposite hers.</p>
				<p>“You think Lily’s a tart, don’t you? And you think I am, don’t you?”</p>
				<p>He frowned at the brutality of the expression.</p>
				<p>“I did think so,” he said. “But of course I’ve changed my mind since I’ve seen something of you.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, of course you’ve changed your mind, have you?” she laughed contemptuously. “And what made you do that? My visit to Brighton?”</p>
				<p>“Even if <em>you</em> are,” said Michael hotly, “I needn’t believe that Lily is. And even if she is, it makes no difference to my wanting to marry her.”</p>
				<p>“Sentimentalist,” she jeered. “Damned sugar-and-water sentimentalist.”</p>
				<p>“Your sneers don’t particularly affect me, you know,” he said politely.</p>
				<p>“Oh, for god’s sake, be less the well-brought-up little gentleman. Cut out the undergraduate. You fool, I was married to an Oxford man. And I’m sitting here now with the glorious knowledge that I’m a perpetual bugbear to his good form.”</p>
				<p>“Because you made a hash of marriage,” Michael pointed out, “it doesn’t follow that I’m not to marry Lily. I can’t understand your objections.”</p>
				<p>“Listen. You couldn’t make her happy. You couldn’t make her any happier than the dozens of men who want to be fond of her for a short time without accepting the responsibility of marriage. Do you think I let any one of those dozens touch her? Not one, if I can get the money myself. And I usually can. Well, why should I stand aside now and let you carry her off, even though you do want to marry her? I could argue against it on your side by telling you that you have no chance of keeping Lily faithful to you? Can’t you see that she has no moral energy? Can’t you see that she’s vain and empty-headed? Can’t you see that? But why should I argue with you for your benefit? I don’t care a damn about your side in the matter.”</p>
				<p>“What exactly do you care about?” Michael asked. “If Lily is what you say, I should have thought you’d be glad to be rid of her. After all, I’m not proposing to do her any wrong.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, to the devil with your right and wrong!” Sylvia cried. “Man can only wrong woman, when he owns her, and if this marriage is going to be a success, you’ll have to own Lily. That’s what I rebel against⁠—the ownership of women. It makes me mad.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, it seems to,” Michael put in. He was beginning to be in a rage with Sylvia’s unreasonableness. “If it comes to ownership,” he went on angrily, “I should have thought that handing her over to the highest bidder time after time would be the real way to make her the pitiable slave of man.”</p>
				<p>“Why?” challenged Sylvia. “You sentimental ass, can’t you understand that she treats them as I treat them, like the swine they are. She’s free. I’m free.”</p>
				<p>“You’re not at all free,” Michael indignantly contradicted. “You’re bound hand and foot by the lust of wealthy brutes. If you read a few less elaborately clever books, and thought a few simpler thoughts, you’d be a good deal happier.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t want to be happier.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, I think you’re merely hysterical,” he said disdainfully. “But, after all, your opinions about yourself don’t matter to me. Only I can’t see what right you have to apply them to Lily; and even if you have the right, I don’t grasp your reason for wanting to.”</p>
				<p>“When I met Lily first,” said Sylvia, “she had joined the chorus of a touring company in which I was. Her mother had just died, and I’d just run away from my husband. I thought her the most beautiful thing I’d ever seen. That’s three years ago. Is she beautiful still?”</p>
				<p>“Of course she is,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>“Well, it’s I who have kept her beautiful. I’ve kept her free also. If sometimes I’ve let her have affairs with men, I’ve taken care that they were with men who could do her no harm, for whom she had no sort of. …”</p>
				<p>“Look here,” Michael burst in. “I’m sick of this conversation. You’re talking like a criminal lunatic. I tell you I’m going to marry her, whatever you think.”</p>
				<p>“I say you won’t, and you shan’t,” Sylvia declared.</p>
				<p>The deadlock had been reached, and they sat there on either side of the fire, glaring at each other.</p>
				<p>“The extraordinary thing is,” said Michael at last, “I thought you had a sense of humor when I first met you. And another extraordinary thing is that I still like you very much. Which probably rather annoys you. But I can’t help saying it.”</p>
				<p>“The opinions of sentimentalists don’t interest me one way or the other,” Sylvia snapped.</p>
				<p>“Will you answer one question? Will you tell me why you were so pleasant on the evening we met?”</p>
				<p>“I really can’t bother to go back as far as that.”</p>
				<p>“You weren’t jealous <em>then</em>,” Michael persisted.</p>
				<p>“Who says I’m jealous now?” she cried.</p>
				<p>“I do. What do you think you are, unless you’re jealous? When is Lily coming down?”</p>
				<p>“She isn’t coming down until you’ve gone.”</p>
				<p>“Then I shall go and call her.”</p>
				<p>“She’s not in London.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t believe you.”</p>
				<p>A second deadlock was reached. Finally Michael decided to give Sylvia the pleasure of supposing that he was beaten for the moment. He congratulated himself upon the cunning of such a move. She was obviously going to be rather difficult to circumvent.</p>
				<p>On the steps of the balcony he turned to her:</p>
				<p>“You hate me because I love Lily, and you hate me twice as much because Lily loves me.”</p>
				<p>“It’s not true,” Sylvia declared. “It’s not true. She doesn’t love you, and what right have you to love her?”</p>
				<p>She tossed back her mane of brown hair, biting her nails.</p>
				<p>“What college was your husband at?” Michael suddenly inquired.</p>
				<p>“Balliol.”</p>
				<p>“I wonder if I knew him.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, no. He was older than you.”</p>
				<p>It was satisfactory, Michael thought as he walked down Tinderbox Lane, that the conversation had ended normally. At least, he had effected so much. She had really been rather wonderful, that strange Sylvia. He would very much like to pit her against Stella. It was satisfactory to have his doubts allayed: notwithstanding her present opposition, he felt that he did owe Sylvia a good deal. But it would be absurd to let Lily continue in such a life: women always quarreled ultimately, and if Sylvia were to leave her, her fall would be rapid and probably irredeemable. Besides, he wanted her for himself. She was to him no less than to Sylvia the most beautiful thing in the world. He did not want to marry a clever woman: he would be much more content with Lily, from whom there could be no reaction upon his nerves. Somehow all his theories of behavior were being referred back to his own desires. It was useless to pretend any longer that his pursuit had been quixotry. Even if it had seemed so on that night when he first heard the news of Lily from Drake, the impulse at the back of his resolve had been his passion for her. When he looked back at his behavior lately, a good deal of it seemed to have been dictated by self-gratification. He remembered how deeply hurt he had felt by Poppy’s treatment of what he had supposed his chivalry. In retrospect his chivalry was seeming uncommonly like self-satisfaction. His friendship for Daisy; for Barnes; for the underworld; it had been nothing but self-satisfaction. Very well, then. If self was to be the touchstone in future, he could face that standard as easily as any other. By the time he had reached the end of Tinderbox Lane Michael was convinced of his profound cynicism. He felt truly obliged to Sylvia for curing him of sentiment. He had so often inveighed against sentiment as the spring of human action, that he was most sincerely grateful for the proof of his own sentimental bias. He would go to Sylvia tomorrow and say frankly that he did not care a bit what Lily had been, was now, or would be; he wanted her. She was something beautiful which he coveted. For the possession of her he was ready to struggle. He would declare war upon Sylvia as upon a rival. She should be rather surprised tomorrow morning, Michael thought, congratulating himself upon this new and ruthless policy.</p>
				<p>On the next morning, however, all Michael’s plans for his future behavior were knocked askew by being unable to get into Mulberry Cottage. His brutal frankness; his cynical egotism; his cold resolution, were ignominiously repulsed by a fast-closed door. Ringing a bell at intervals of a minute was a very undignified substitute for the position he had imagined himself taking up in that small square room. This errand-boy who stood at his elbow, gazing with such rapt interest at his ringing of the bell, was by no means the audience he had pictured.</p>
				<p>“Does it amuse you to watch a bell being rung?” Michael asked.</p>
				<p>The errand-boy shook his head.</p>
				<p>“Well, why do you do it?”</p>
				<p>“I wasn’t,” said the errand-boy.</p>
				<p>“What are you doing, then?”</p>
				<p>“Nothing.”</p>
				<p>Michael could not grapple with the errand-boy, and he retired from Tinderbox Lane until after lunch. He rang again, but he could get no answer to his ringing. At intervals until midnight he came back, but there was never an answer all the time. He went home and wrote to Sylvia:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p>173 Cheyne Walk,<br/>
						<abbr class="postal eoc">S.W.</abbr></p>
					</header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Dear <span epub:type="z3998:recipient">Sylvia</span>,</p>
					<p>If you aren’t afraid of being beaten, why are you afraid to let me see Lily?</p>
					<p>I dare you to let me see her. Be sporting.</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Yours,</p>
						<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">
							<abbr class="name">M. F.</abbr>
						</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>To Lily he wrote:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Darling,</p>
					<p>Meet me outside South Kensington Station any time from twelve to three.</p>
					<footer>
						<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">Michael.</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">Alone, of course.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Next day he waited three hours and a half for Lily, but she did not come. All the time he spent in a secondhand bookshop with one eye on the street. When he got home, he found a note from Sylvia:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">Come tomorrow at twelve.</p>
					<footer>
						<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">
							<abbr class="name">S. S.</abbr>
						</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Michael crumpled up the note and flung it triumphantly into the waste-paper basket.</p>
				<p>“I thought I should sting you into giving way,” he exclaimed.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough opened the door to him, when he arrived.</p>
				<p>“They’ve gone away, the demons!” was what she said.</p>
				<p>Michael was conscious of the garden rimmed with hoarfrost stretching behind her in a vista; and as he stared at this silver sparkling desert he realized that Sylvia had inflicted upon him a crushing humiliation.</p>
				<p>“Where have they gone?” he asked blankly.</p>
				<p>“Oh, they never tell me where they get to. But they took their luggage. There’s a note for you from Sylvia. Come in, and I’ll give it to you.”</p>
				<p>Michael followed her drearily along the gravel path.</p>
				<p>“We shall be having the snowdrops before we know where we are,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough said.</p>
				<p>“Very soon,” he agreed. He would have assented if she had foretold begonias tomorrow morning.</p>
				<p>In the sitting-room Michael saw Sylvia’s note, a bleak little envelope waiting for him on that tablecloth. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough left him to read it alone. The old silence of the room haunted him again now, the silence that was so much intensified by the canary hopping about his cage. Almost he decided to throw the letter unread into the fire.</p>
				<p>From every corner of the room the message of Sylvia’s hostility was stretching out toward him. “Sweet,” said the canary. Michael tore open the envelope and read:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>Perhaps you’ll admit that my influence is as strong as yours. You’d much better give her up. In a way, I’m rather sorry for you, but not enough to make me hand over Lily to you. Do realize, my dear young thing, that you aren’t even beginning to understand women. I admit that there’s precious little to understand in Lily. And for that very reason, when even you begin to see through her beauty, you’ll hate her. Now <em>I</em> hate to think of this happening. She’s a thousand times better off with me than she ever could be with you. Perhaps my maternal instinct has gone off the lines a bit and fixed itself on Lily. And yet I don’t think it’s anything so sickly as sentimental mothering. No, I believe I just like to sit and look at her. Lily’s rather cross with me for taking her away from “such a nice boy.” Does that please you? And doesn’t it exactly describe you? However, I won’t crow. Don’t break the lusters, when you read this. They belong to Fatty. What I suggest for you is a walk in Kensington Gardens to the refrain of “Blast the whole bloody world!” Now look shocked, my little Vandyck.</p>
					<footer>
						<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">
							<abbr class="name">S. S.</abbr>
						</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Michael tore the letter up. He did not want to read and reread it for the rest of the day. His eyelids were pricking unpleasantly, and he went out to find <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough. He was really sensitive that even a room should witness such a discomfiture. The landlady was downstairs in the kitchen, where he had not yet been. In this room of copper pots and pans, with only the garden in view, she might have been a farmer’s wife.</p>
				<p>“Sit down,” she said. “And make yourself at home.”</p>
				<p>“Will you sit down?” Michael asked.</p>
				<p>“Oh, well, yes, if it’s any pleasure to you.” She took off her apron and seated herself, smoothing the bombasine skirt over her knees.</p>
				<p>A tabby cat purred between them; a kettle was singing; and there was a smell of allspice.</p>
				<p>“You really don’t know where the girls have gone?” Michael began.</p>
				<p>“No more than you do,” she assured him. “But that Sylvia is really a Turk.”</p>
				<p>“I suppose Lily didn’t tell you that I used to know her six years ago?” he asked.</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes, she talked about you a lot. A good deal more than Miss Sylvia liked, that’s a sure thing.”</p>
				<p>“Well, do you think it’s fair for Sylvia to carry her off like this? I want to marry Lily, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough.”</p>
				<p>“There, only fancy what a daring that Sylvia has. She’s a nice girl, and very high-spirited, but she <em>is</em> a Miss Dictatorial.”</p>
				<p>Michael felt encouraged by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough’s attitude, and he made up his mind to throw himself upon her mercy. Sentiment would be his only weapon, and he found some irony in the reflection that he had set out this morning to be a brutal cynic in his treatment of the situation.</p>
				<p>“Do you think it’s fair to try to prevent Lily from marrying me? You know as well as I do that the life she’s leading now isn’t going to be the best life possible for her. You’re a woman of the world, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough⁠—”</p>
				<p>“I was once,” she corrected. “And a very naughty world it was, too.”</p>
				<p>“You were glad, weren’t you, when the Captain brought you to this house? You were glad to feel secure? You would have married him?”</p>
				<p>“No, I wouldn’t marry him. I preferred to be as I am. Still that’s nothing for Lily to go by. She’s more suited for marriage than what I was.”</p>
				<p>“Don’t you think,” Michael went on eagerly, “that if after six years I’m longing to marry her, I ought to marry her? I know that she might be much worse off than she is, but equally she might be much better off. Look here, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough, it’s up to you. You’ve got to make it possible for me to see her. You’ve got to.”</p>
				<p>“But if I do anything like that,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough, “it means I have an unpleasantness with Sylvia. That girl’s a regular heathen when she turns nasty. I should be left all alone in my little house. And what with Spring coming on and all, and the flowers looking so nice in the garden, I should feel very much the square peg in the round hole.”</p>
				<p>“Lily and I would come and see you,” he promised. “And I don’t think Sylvia would leave you. She’d never find another house like Mulberry Cottage or another landlady like you.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I daresay; but you can’t tell these things. Once she’s in her tantrums, there’s no saying what will happen. And, besides, I don’t know what you want me to do.”</p>
				<p>“I want you to send me word the first moment that Lily’s alone for an hour; and when I ring, do answer the bell.”</p>
				<p>“Now that wasn’t my fault yesterday,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough. “Really I thought we should have the fire-escape in. The way you nagged at that poor bell! It was really chronic. But would she let me so much as speak to you, even with the door only on the jar? Certainly not! And all the time she was snapping round the house like a young crocodile. And yet I’m really fond of that girl. Well, when the Captain died, she was a daughter to me. Oh, she was, she was really a daughter to me. Well, you see, his sister invited me to the funeral, which I thought was very nice, her being an old maid and very strict. Now, I hardly liked to put on a widow’s cap and yet I hardly didn’t like to. But Sylvia, she said not on any account, and I was very glad I didn’t, because there was a lot of persons there very standoffish, and I should have been at my wits to know whatever I was going to say.”</p>
				<p>“Look here,” said Michael. “When the Captain gave you this house, he loved you. You were young, weren’t you? You were young and beautiful? Well, would you like to think your house was going to be used to separate two people very much in love with each other? You can say I climbed over the wall. You can make any excuse you like to Sylvia. But, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough, do, do let me know when Lily is going to be alone. If she doesn’t want to come away with me, it will be my fault, and that will be the end of it. If only you’ll help me at the beginning. Will you? Will you promise to help me?”</p>
				<p>“I never could resist a man,” sighed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough, with resignation. “There’s a character! Oh, well, it’s my own and no one else’s, that’s one good job.”</p>
				<p>Michael had to wait until February was nearly over before he heard from her. It had been very difficult to remain quietly at Cheyne Walk, but he knew that if he were to show any sign of activity, Sylvia would carry Lily off again.</p>
				<p>“A person to see you, sir,” said the tortoise-mouthed parlormaid.</p>
				<p>Michael found <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough sitting in the hall. She was wearing a bonnet tied with very bright cerise ribbons.</p>
				<p>“They’ve had a rumpus, the pair of them, this afternoon. And Sylvia’s gone off in the sulks. I really was quite aggravated with her. Oh, she’s a willful spitfire, that girl, sometimes. She really is.”</p>
				<p>Michael was coming away without a coat or hat, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough stopped him.</p>
				<p>“Now don’t behave like a silly. Dress yourself properly and don’t make me run. I’m getting stout, you know,” she protested.</p>
				<p>“We’ll get a hansom.”</p>
				<p>“What, ride in a hansom? Never! A four-wheeler if you <em>like</em>.”</p>
				<p>It was difficult to find a four-wheeler, and Michael was nearly mad with impatience.</p>
				<p>“Now don’t upset yourself. Sylvia won’t be back tonight, and there’s no need to tug at me as if I was a cork in a bottle. People will think we’re a walking poppy-show, if you don’t act more quiet. They’re all turning round to stare at us.”</p>
				<p>A four-wheeler appeared presently, and very soon they were walking down Tinderbox Lane. Michael felt rather like a little boy out with his nurse, as he kept turning back to exhort <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough to come more quickly. She grew more and more red in the face, and so wheezy that he was afraid something would happen to her, and for a few yards made no attempt to hurry her along. At last they reached Mulberry Cottage.</p>
				<p>“Supposing Sylvia has come back!” he said.</p>
				<p>“I keep on telling you she’s gone away for the night. Now get on indoors with you. You’ve nearly been my death.”</p>
				<p>“I say, you don’t know how grateful I am to you!” Michael exclaimed, turning round and grasping her fat hands.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough shouted upstairs to Lily as loudly as her breathlessness would permit:</p>
				<p>“I’ve brought you back that surprise packet I promised.”</p>
				<p>Then she vanished, and Michael waited for Lily at the foot of the stairs. She came down very soon, looking very straight and slim in her philamot frock of Chinese crape that so well became her. Soon she was in his arms and glad enough to be petted after Sylvia’s rages.</p>
				<p>“Lily, how can you bear to let Sylvia manage you like this? It’s absolutely intolerable.”</p>
				<p>“She’s been horrid to me today,” said Lily resentfully.</p>
				<p>“Well, why do you put up with it?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, I don’t know. I hate always squabbling. It’s much easier to give way to her, and usually I don’t much mind.”</p>
				<p>“You don’t much mind whether we’re married!” Michael exclaimed. “How can you let Sylvia persuade you against marriage? Darling girl, if you marry me you shall do just as you like. I simply want you to look beautiful. You’d be happy married to me⁠—you really would.”</p>
				<p>“Sylvia says marriage is appallingly dull, and my mother and father didn’t get on, and Doris doesn’t get on with the man she’s married to. In fact, everybody seems to hate it.”</p>
				<p>“Do you hate me?” Michael demanded.</p>
				<p>“No, I think you’re awfully sweet.”</p>
				<p>“Well, why don’t you marry me? You’ll have plenty of money and nothing to bother about. I think you’d thoroughly enjoy being married.”</p>
				<p>For an instant, as he argued with her, Michael wavered in his resolve. For an instant it seemed, after all, impossible to marry this girl. A chill came over him, but he shook it off, and he saw only her loveliness, the eyes sullen with thoughts of Sylvia, the lips pouting at the remembrance of a tyranny. And again as he watched her beauty, the bitter thought crossed his mind that it would be easier to possess her without marriage. Then he thought of her at seventeen. “<q>Michael, why do you make me love you so?</q>” Was that the last protest she ever made against the thralldom of passion? If it was, the blame must primarily be his, since he had not heeded her reproach.</p>
				<p>“Lily,” he cried, catching her to him. “You’re coming away with me now.”</p>
				<p>He kissed her a hundred times.</p>
				<p>“Now! Now! Do you hear me?”</p>
				<p>She surrendered to his will, and as he held her Michael thought grimly what an absurd paradox it was, that in order to make her consent to marry him, he like the others must play upon the baser side of her yielding nature. There were difficulties of packing and of choosing frocks and hats, but Michael had his way through them all.</p>
				<p>“Quite an elopement,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough proclaimed.</p>
				<p>“A very virtuous elopement,” said Michael, with a laugh.</p>
				<p>“Oh, but shan’t I catch it when that Hottentot comes back!”</p>
				<p>“Well, it’s Sylvia’s fault,” said Lily fretfully. “She shouldn’t worry me all the time to know whether I like her better than anyone else in the world.”</p>
				<p>The man arrived with a truck for the luggage.</p>
				<p>“Where are you going?” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gainsborough asked. “I declare, you’re like two babes in the wood.”</p>
				<p>“To my sister’s in Huntingdonshire,” said Michael, and he wrote out the address.</p>
				<p>“Oh, in the country! Well, Summer’ll be on us before we know where we are. I declare, my snowdrops are quite finished.”</p>
				<p>“Is your sister pretty?” Lily asked, as they were driving to King’s Cross.</p>
				<p>“She’s handsome,” said Michael. “You’ll like her, I think. And her husband was a great friend of mine. By the way, I must send a wire to say we’re coming.”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
