<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4: Unending Childhood</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Unending Childhood</span>
				</h3>
				<p>After whooping-cough came chickenpox, and it was settled that Michael should leave the Kindergarten where these illnesses were caught. A French governess was to teach him every morning and to walk with him every afternoon. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane wrote to Nurse to tell her of this decision and to announce that a Madame Flauve would on Monday next arrive at 64 Carlington Road to superintend the education of Michael. This news reached Nurse on the preceding Friday and threw her into an agitation. The whole house was turned upside down: curtains were changed; floors were beeswaxed; furniture was polished; pictures were dusted. All Saturday and Friday a great cleaning took place, and on Sunday every cushion was smoothed and patted; chairs were adjusted; mats were shaken; flowers were distributed, until in the evening Nurse and Cook and Annie, followed by Michael, marched over the house and examined their handiwork.</p>
				<p>“Well, I hope we shall see something worth looking at,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith. “I never worked so hard in all my natural.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes. Must get the place nice. Not going to have strange people come here and grumble,” said Nurse.</p>
				<p>“What is this Madame Flauve? Is she a lady?” Cook asked.</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes. Yes. A lady. French. Very particular,” Nurse replied.</p>
				<p>Michael wondered what his governess would be like. He never remembered to have seen Nanny so reverently excited before.</p>
				<p>“I’ve heard a lot about these French women,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith. “A lot about them, I have. They live very gay, don’t they?”</p>
				<p>“Doesn’t matter how they live. No. No. Must have everything at its best,” Nurse insisted.</p>
				<p>By the time the scouring of the house was done, Michael was prepared for the advent of a creature so lovely that he made up his mind the mere sight of her would fill him with joy. He had not settled exactly which princess she would most nearly resemble. As he turned over the pages of his fairy-books, he would fancy with every illustration that here was to be seen the image of his beautiful French governess. As he lay awake in his bed on a quiet Sunday evening, so pleasant was the imagination of her radiancy that fears and horrors were driven away by the power of her beauty’s spell. The night acquired something of the peace and sanctity of Christmas Eve, when the air was hallowed by Santa Claus on his jovial pilgrimage. He had never felt so little oppressed by the night, so confident in the might of good.</p>
				<p>On Monday morning Michael jigged through his dressing, jigged downstairs to breakfast, jigged through the meal itself and jigged upstairs to the dining-room to watch for the splendid arrival. He tambourinated upon the windowpane a gay little tune, jigging the while from foot to foot in an ecstasy of anticipation.</p>
				<p>Nurse had decided that the morning-room was not a fit place for such a paragon to perform her duties. Nor did she feel that the day-nursery was worthy of her. So, even while Michael jigged at his vigil, Nurse was arming the dining-room table for an encounter with greatness. Inkpots were dusted and displayed; blotting-pads, including one poker⁠—worked with a view of Antwerp Cathedral, were unfolded. Pens and pencils and pieces of india-rubber and pen-wipers and boxes of nibs and drawing-pins were lavishly scattered about the green tablecloth. Various blue exercise-books gleamed in the April sunlight and, to set the seal upon the whole business, a calendar of Great Thoughts was roughly divested of ninety-eight great thoughts at once, in order that for this rare female a correct announcement should celebrate the ninth of April, her famous date. At five minutes to ten Nurse and Michael were both in a state of excitement; Cook was saying that she had never regretted the inadequacy of the kitchen arrangements of Sixty-four until this moment; and Annie was bracing herself for the real effort, the opening of the door to Madame Flauve. The only calm person was Stella who, clasping a rubber doll with tight curly rubber hair and a stomachic squeak, chanted to herself the saga of Madame Flauve’s arrival.</p>
				<p>At two minutes past ten Michael said somebody was coming up the steps, and a ring confirmed his assertion. The door was opened. Madame Flauve was heard rubbing her boots on the <b>salve</b> of the mat, was heard putting away her umbrella in the peacock-blue china umbrella-stand, was heard enquiring for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane and was announced inaudibly by Annie.</p>
				<p>Michael’s heart sank when he beheld a fat young Frenchwoman with a bilious complexion and little pig’s eyes and a dowdy black mantle and a common black hat. As for Nurse, she sniffed quite audibly and muttered an insincere hope that Madame Flauve would find everything to her liking. The governess answered in the thick voice of one who is always swallowing jujubes that without a doubt she would find everything, and presently Nurse left the room with many a backward glance of contempt towards Madame Flauve.</p>
				<p>When the lessons began (or rather before they began) a timetable was drawn up by Madame Flauve:</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<th rowspan="3">Monday</th>
							<td rowspan="3">{</td>
							<td>10⁠–⁠11</td>
							<td>French</td>
							<td rowspan="3">2:30⁠–⁠4</td>
							<td rowspan="3">Walk</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>11⁠–⁠12</td>
							<td>Geography</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>12⁠–⁠1</td>
							<td>History</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<th rowspan="3">Tuesday</th>
							<td rowspan="3">{</td>
							<td>10⁠–⁠11</td>
							<td>Geography</td>
							<td rowspan="3">2:30⁠–⁠4</td>
							<td rowspan="3">Walk</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>11⁠–⁠12</td>
							<td>History</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>12⁠–⁠1</td>
							<td>French</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<th rowspan="3">Wednesday</th>
							<td rowspan="3">{</td>
							<td>10⁠–⁠11</td>
							<td>History</td>
							<td rowspan="3">2:30⁠–⁠4</td>
							<td rowspan="3">Walk</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>11⁠–⁠12</td>
							<td>Geography</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>12⁠–⁠1</td>
							<td>French</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<th rowspan="3">Thursday</th>
							<td rowspan="3">{</td>
							<td>10⁠–⁠11</td>
							<td>French</td>
							<td rowspan="3">2:30⁠–⁠4</td>
							<td rowspan="3">Walk</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>11⁠–⁠12</td>
							<td>History</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>12⁠–⁠1</td>
							<td>Geography</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<th rowspan="3">Friday</th>
							<td rowspan="3">{</td>
							<td>10⁠–⁠11</td>
							<td>Geography</td>
							<td rowspan="3">2:30⁠–⁠4</td>
							<td rowspan="3">Walk</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>11⁠–⁠12</td>
							<td>French</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>12⁠–⁠1</td>
							<td>History</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>Michael, when he saw the programme of his work, felt much depressed. It seemed to lack variety and he was not very much cheered up to hear that at meals only French would be spoken. Those meals were dreadful. At first Nurse and Stella were present, but when Nanny found that Madame wanted to teach Stella the French for knife and fork, she declined to have dinner downstairs any longer, and Michael and Madame Flauve were left to dine tête-à-tête on dull food and a languishing conversation.</p>
				<p>“Madam indeed,” Nurse would sniff, when the governess had left after tea, “I never heard of such a thing in all my life. Madam! A fine Madam!”</p>
				<p>“What an imperence,” agreed <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith. “Fancy, a ordinary volgar thing like that to go calling herself Madam, whatever shall we come to?”</p>
				<p>“It does seem a cheek, don’t it?” said Annie.</p>
				<p>“I never!” Cook gasped. “I never! Madam! Well, I could almost laugh at the sauce of it. And all that cleaning as you might say for a person as isn’t a scrap better than you and me.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, I’ve written to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane,” said Nurse. “I said there must be some mistake been made. Oh, yes, a mistake⁠—must be a mistake.”</p>
				<p>Michael did not much enjoy the walks with his governess. He was always taken to a secondhand furniture-shop in the Hammersmith Road, not a pleasant old furniture-shop with Toby mugs and stuffed birds and coins; but a barrack full of red washing-stands and white-handled chests of drawers. Madame Flauve informed him that she was engaged in furnishing at that moment, and would immediately show him a locket with the portrait of her husband inset. Michael could not gain any clear idea of what <abbr>M.</abbr> Flauve was like, since all that remained was a nebulous profile smothered by a very black moustache. Madame Flauve told him that <abbr>M.</abbr> Flauve was “<i xml:lang="fr">tout-à-fait charmant, mais charmant, mon petit. Il était si aimable, si gentil et d’un cœur très très bon</i>.” Michael grew very tired of being jostled outside the furniture-shop every afternoon, while his governess grubbed around the ugly furniture and argued with the man about the prices. The only article she ever bought was a commode, which so violently embarrassed Michael that he blushed the whole way home. But Madame Flauve often made him blush and would comment upon subjects not generally mentioned except by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith, and even by her only in a spirit of hearty coarseness that did not make Michael feel ashamed like this Frenchwoman’s suggestion of the nasty. He was on one occasion very much disgusted by her remarks on the inside of an egg that was slightly set. Yet while he was disgusted, his curiosity was stimulated by the information imparted, and he made further enquiries from Nurse that evening. Nanny was horrified, and said plainly that she considered this governess no better than a low beast and that she should write accordingly to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane.</p>
				<p>After a month or two Michael was sent back to school in the morning, though the afternoon walks still continued for a time. When Michael returned to the Misses Marrow, he was promoted to the class above the Kindergarten and was set to learn the elements of Latin in a desultory and unpractical way, that is to say he was made to learn⁠—</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td>Nominative,</td>
							<td>mensa,</td>
							<td>a table</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Vocative,</td>
							<td>mensa,</td>
							<td>O table</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td>Accusative,</td>
							<td>mensam,</td>
							<td>a table</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
				<p>and the rest of the unintelligible rigmarole. He had no clear notion what Latin was, and so far as he could make out nobody else at the Miss Marrows’ school had any clearer notion. Indeed, the only distinct addition to his knowledge of life was gained from Vernon Brown who with great ingenuity had hollowed out a cork and by the insertion of several pins in the front had made of it a miniature cage in which he kept a fly. All the other boys were much impressed by Vernon Brown’s achievement, and very soon they all came to school with flies captive in excavated corks. Michael longed to be like these bigger boys and pined for a cage. One day Edward Arnott gave him one, and all the rest of that day Michael watched the fly trying to escape. When he showed it to Madame Flauve, she professed herself shocked by the cruelty of it and begged him to release the fly, asserting that she would find him a substitute which would deceive all the other boys. Michael agreed to release his captive and the long-imprisoned fly walked painfully out of his cell. Then Madame Flauve chipped off a little piece of coal and tied it round with one of her own hairs and showed Michael how by cunningly twisting this hair, the coal would gain the appearance of mobility. Michael was doubtful at first, but Madame’s exaggerated encouragement led him to suppose that it was safe to practise the deception on his companions. So on the next day he proceeded to exhibit his ‘fly.’ But everybody knew it was coal and jeered at Michael and made him very unhappy and anxious never again to attempt to differentiate himself or his actions from the rest of mankind.</p>
				<p>Michael’s mother came home towards the end of July, and Madame Flauve vanished to her husband and house and furniture. Michael did not regret her. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane asked him many questions and particularly she wanted to know if he was perfectly happy. Michael said ‘yes,’ and his mother seemed satisfied. She was now very much taken up with Stella, who was a lovely little girl with grey eyes and light brown glinting hair. Michael did not exactly feel jealous of his sister, but he had an emotion of disappointment that no longer could he be alone with his mother in a fragrant intimacy from which the perpetually sleeping Stella was excluded. Now Stella no longer slept all the time, but, on the contrary, was very much awake and very eager to be entertained. Michael also felt a twinge of regret that Stella should be able out of her own self to entertain grown-up people. He wished that he could compose these wonderful, endless songs of hers. He could not but admit that they were wonderful, and exactly like real poetry. To be sure their subjects were ordinary enough. There was no magic in them. Stella would simply sing of getting up in the morning and of the morning bath and the towel and the bread and milk for breakfast. She would sing, too, of the ride in the perambulator and of the ladies who paid her compliments as she passed. It was a little galling to Michael that he, so long his mother’s only companion, should have to share her love with such an insidious rival. Curious men with long hair came to the house, apparently just to see Stella; for they took no notice at all of Michael. These long-haired visitors would sit round in the drawing-room, while Stella played at the piano pieces that were not half so hummable as those which Michael had already learned to play in violent allegretto. Stella would sit upright in her starchiest frock and widest sash and play without any music a long and boring noise that made Michael feel very fidgety. He would endure it for a while and then he would have to go out of the room. The first time he had done this he had expected somehow that people would run after him to bring him back. But nobody moved. Everyone was intent upon Stella and her noise. They were all grunting and clearing their throats and making unintelligible exclamations. Michael was glad that they had begun to build houses in the waste ground opposite. It was better to watch men climbing up ladders and walking over planks and messing with lumps of mortar than to sit there among those guttural men in an atmosphere of Stella worship. He felt sometimes that he would like to pinch Stella’s legs⁠—they looked so sleek and well-behaved, as she sat there playing the piano. Michael was never invited to play on the drawing-room piano. He was only allowed to play up in the day-nursery, with merely the ambition of one day being able to reach the pedals to stir him on.</p>
				<p>“Ach, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Vane,” he heard these long-haired men declare. “Your daughter is wonderful. Ach! Ach! Ach! She is a genius. She will be the great bianist of the new generation. Ach! Ach! Ach!”</p>
				<p>Michael began to feel that his love for his mother or her love for him did not matter. He began to feel that only what he himself thought and wanted did matter; and when she went away again he was sorry, but not so sorry as he used to be. One of these long-haired men now began to come every day to give Stella lessons on the drawing-room piano. He would give a very loud knock and hang up a wide-brimmed black hat in the hall and clear his throat and button up his coat very tightly and march into the drawing-room to wait for Stella to be brought down. Stella would come down the stairs with her grey eyes shining and her hair all fuzzy and her hands smelling of pink soap, while Nurse would blow very importantly and tell Michael not to peep round corners. Stella’s music lessons were much grander than Michael’s in the stuffy backroom of Miss Marrow’s. Besides, Michael’s music lessons were now particularly unpleasant, because Miss Hunt, his mistress, had grown two warts on her first finger during the summer holidays, which made him feel sick during their eternal duets.</p>
				<p>The withdrawal of Madame Flauve from the superintendence of Michael’s afternoon walks was apparently a great blow to Nurse. She had acquired a habit either of retiring to the night-nursery or of popping out of the backdoor on secret errands. Stella in the charge of Annie was perfectly happy upstairs, and Nurse resented very strongly Michael’s enquiries as to where she was going. Michael had no ulterior reasons for his questions. He was sincerely interested by these afternoon walks of Nurse, and speculated often upon her destination. She would always return very cheerful and would often bring him home small presents⁠—a dark blue bird on a pin at boat-race time (for Nurse was staunchly Oxford), a penny packet of stamps most of which were duplicates inside, penny illustrated books of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cock Robin</i> or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tom Thumb</i>; and once she brought him home a Night Companion. This Night Companion was a club-headed stick, very powerful and warranted to secure the owner from a murderous attack. It was one of a row in the window of a neighbouring umbrella-shop, a long row of Night Companions that cost one shilling each. Michael liked his stick and took it to bed with him and was comforted, when he woke up, by the sight of its knotted head upon the bolster. He grew very intimate with the stick and endowed it with character and temperament and humanity. He would often stare at the still unpurchased Night Companions in the shop, trying to discover if any other of them were so beneficent and so pleasant a companion as his own. In time he took a fancy to another, and begged Nurse to be allowed to buy this for Stella. Nurse was gratified by his appreciation of her present and gave him leave to break into the ten-shilling piece to endow Stella with a Companion. Michael himself carried it home, wrapped in a flimsy brown paper and tied up as he thought unnecessarily with a flimsy string. Stella was told to take it to bed with her and did so, but by some accident grazed her forehead on the Night Companion’s knotty head and cried so much that it was taken away from her. This was all the better for Michael who thenceforth had two Night Companions⁠—one on either side of him to guard him from the door and the window.</p>
				<p>Still, notwithstanding these presents, Nurse grew more and more irritable to find Michael watching her exits from and entrances into 64 Carlington Road. Once, she was so much annoyed to see Michael’s face pressed against the pane of the morning-room window that she slid all the way down the area-steps and sent Michael to bed as a punishment for peeping. At last she decided that Michael must go for walks by himself and lest he should be lost or get into mischief, every walk must be in the same direction, along the same road to the same place and back. He was to walk up Carlington Road into the Hammersmith Road and along the Kensington Road as far as the Earl’s Court Road. Here he was to stop and turn round and walk back to Carlington Road on his traces.</p>
				<p>Michael detested this walk. He would stump up the area-steps, watched by Nurse, and he would walk steadily, looking neither to the right nor to the left according to orders, as far as 44 Carlington Road. Here in the morning-room window was a small aquarium, sadly mobile with half a dozen pale goldfish, that Michael would be compelled to watch for a few seconds before he turned round and acknowledged the fact that Nurse was flicking him on with her hand. Michael would proceed past the other houses until he came to 22 Carlington Road, where a break occurred, caused by a house entirely different from any of the others, at the side of which was a huge double door. This was sometimes open, and inside could be seen men hammering with chisels at enormous statues including representations of Queen Victoria and of a benignant lion. Next to this house was a post office, not an ordinary post office where stamps could be bought, but a harum-scarum place, full of postmen running up and down and emptying bags and hammering on letters and talking very loudly and very quickly. By this office Carlington Road made an abrupt rectangular turn past a tumble-down tarred fence, through whose interstices could be seen a shadowy garden full of very long pale grass and of trees with jet-black trunks. Beyond the trees was a tumble-down house with big bare windows glinting amongst the ivy. After this Carlington Road went on again with smaller houses of a deeper red brick than those in the part where Michael lived. They had no basements, and one could see into their dining-rooms, so close were they to the road. When 2 Carlington Road was reached a tall advertisement hoarding began, and for a hundred yards the walk became absolutely interesting. Then Carlington Mansions rose majestic, and Michael, who had been told that they were flats and had heard people wondering at this strange new method of existence, loitered for a moment in order to watch a man in a uniform, sitting on a wooden chair and reading a pink newspaper. He also read the names of people who were either out or in, and settled, when he was older, to live in a flat in the security of many other families and a man in a green uniform. The roar of the Hammersmith Road burst upon him, and dreams were over for a while, as he hurried along past eight shops, at none of which he would dare to look since he read in a book of a boy who had been taken off to the police station on a charge of theft, though he was actually as innocent as Michael himself and was merely interested by the contents of a shop window. The next turning to Carlington Road was a queer terrace, very quiet except that it overlooked the railway, very quiet and melancholy and somehow wicked. Nothing ever turned down here except an occasional dog or cat; no servants stood gossiping by area-gates, and at the end of it loomed the tumble-down house whose garden Michael had already seen near the post office. He used to think as he left Padua Terrace behind him that one day for a great adventure he would like to walk along under its elm-trees to discover if anyone did live in those dark houses; but he never managed to be brave enough to do so. Michael now crossed the railway bridge and looked at the advertisements: then followed a dull line of iron railings with rusty pineapples on top of each of them. These were bounded at each end by gates that were marked ‘Private. No Thoroughfare,’ and after the second gate came the first crossing. Michael had been told to be very careful of crossings, and he used to poise himself on the kerb for a moment to see if any carts were near. If none were even in sight, he used to run across as quickly as he could. There were three other crossings before Earl’s Court Road was reached, and one of them was so wide that he was very glad indeed when it was put behind him. All the way, terrace after terrace of grim houses, set back from the high road behind shrubberies, had to be passed, and all the way Michael used to hum to himself for company and diversion and encouragement. The only interesting event was a pavement-artist, and he was very often not there. It was an exasperating and monotonous walk, and he hated it for the gloom it shed upon all his afternoons.</p>
				<p>Sometimes Michael would arrive home before Nanny, and then he would have to endure a long cross-examination upon his route. The walk was not sufficiently interesting to invent tales about, and he resented Nurse’s incredulous attitude and wrinkled obstinate face. Indeed, Michael began to resent Nurse altogether, and so far as he was able he avoided her. His scheme of things was logical: he had already a philosophy, and his conception of the wonder inherent in everything was evidently not unique, because the pictures in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i> proved conclusively that what Michael thought, other people besides himself thought. He might be old-fashioned, as Nurse assured him he was; but if to be old-fashioned was to live in the world of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i>, he certainly preferred it to the world in which Nanny lived. That seemed to him a circumscribed and close existence for which he had no sympathy. It was a world of poking about in medicine-cupboards, of blind unreasonableness, of stupidity and malice and blank ugliness. He would sit watching Nanny nibbling with her front teeth the capers of the caper sauce, and he would hate her. She interfered with him, with his daydreams and toys and meals; and the only time when he wanted her presence was in the middle of the night, when she was either drinking her glass of ale in the kitchen or snoring heavily in the next room. Michael’s only ambition was to live in his own world. This he would have shared with his mother, but her visits were now so rare that it was unwise to rely on her presence for happiness. He was learning to do without her: Nurse he had never yet learnt to endure. She charged ferociously into his fancies, shattering them with her fussy interference, just as she would snatch away his clay pipe, when the most perfect bubble was trembling on the edge of the bowl.</p>
				<p>“Time for tea,” she would mutter. “Time for bed,” she would chatter. Always it was time for something unpleasant.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith, on the other hand, was a person whose attractions grew with longer friendship, as Nurse’s decreased even from the small quantity she originally possessed. As Michael month by month grew older, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith expanded towards him. She found him an attentive, even a breathless listener to her rollicking tales. Her life Michael plainly perceived to have been crammed with exciting adventures. In earliest youth she had been forced by cunning to outwit a brutal father with the frightening habit of coming home in the evening and taking off his belt to her and her brothers and her sisters. The house in which she lived had been full of hiding-places, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith, picturing herself to Michael of less ample girth, described wonderfully how her father had actually routed for her with a broom-handle while her mother sat weeping into an apron. Then it appeared that it was the custom of small boys in the street of her youth to sell liquorice-water in exchange for pins.</p>
				<p>“But was it nice?” asked Michael, remembering liquorice-powder.</p>
				<p>“Lovely stuff,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith affirmed. “They used to go calling up and down, ‘Fine liquorice-water! Fine liquorice-water! Bring out your pins and have a bottle of liquorice-water.’ ”</p>
				<p>“And did you?” asked Michael.</p>
				<p>“Did we? Of course we did⁠—every pin in the place. There wasn’t a pin in the whole street after those boys had gone by.”</p>
				<p>“What else did you do when you were little, Mrs, Frith?”</p>
				<p>“What else? Why everything.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, but tell me what,” Michael begged, clasping his knees and looking earnestly at Cook.</p>
				<p>“Why once I went to a Sunday-school treat and got thrown off of a donkey and showed more than I meant and the boys all hollered after me going to Sunday-school and I used to stand behind a corner and dodge them. The saucy demons!”</p>
				<p>These tales were endless, and Michael thought how jolly it would be to set out early one summer morning with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith and look for adventures like <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i>. This became a favourite daydream, and he used to fancy <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith tossed in a blanket like Sancho Panza. What company she would be, and it would be possible with two donkeys. He had seen women as fat as her riding on donkeys by the seaside.</p>
				<p>One day <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith told him she was thinking of getting married again, and on a Sunday afternoon Michael was introduced to her future husband, a certain <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hopkins, who had a shining red head and an enormous coloured handkerchief into which he trumpeted continuously. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hopkins also had a daughter three or four years older than Michael⁠—a wizened little girl called Flossie who spoke in a sort of hiss and wore very conspicuous underclothing of red flannelette. Michael and Flossie played together shyly under the admiring patronage of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hopkins, and were just beginning to be friendly when Nurse came in and said:</p>
				<p>“Can’t be allowed. No, no. Never heard of such a thing. Tut-tut.”</p>
				<p>After this Nurse and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith did not seem to get on very well, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith used to talk about ‘people as gave theirselves airs which they had no business to of done.’ She was kinder than ever to Michael and gave him as many sultanas as he wanted and told him all about the house into which she and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hopkins and Flossie would presently depart from Carlington Road.</p>
				<p>“Are you going away?” Michael asked, aghast.</p>
				<p>“Going to be married,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith.</p>
				<p>“But I don’t want you to go.”</p>
				<p>“There, bless your heart, I’ve a good mind to stay. I believe you’ll miss your poor old <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith, eh, ducky?”</p>
				<p>Everybody nice went away, Michael thought. It was extraordinary how only nasty food and nasty people were wholesome.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith’s departure was even more exciting than her stories. One afternoon Michael found her in the kitchen, dancing about with her skirts kilted above her knees. He was a little embarrassed at first, but very soon he had to laugh because she was evidently not behaving like this in order to show off, but because she enjoyed dancing about the kitchen.</p>
				<p>“Why are you dancing, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith?” he asked.</p>
				<p>“Happy as a lark, lovey,” she answered in an odd voice. “Happy as a lark, for we won’t go home till morning, we won’t go home till morning,” and singing, she twirled round and round until she sank into a wicker armchair. At this moment Annie came running downstairs with Nurse, and both of them glared at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith with shocked expressions.</p>
				<p>“What ever are you doing, Cook?” said Nurse.</p>
				<p>“That’s all right, lovey. That’s All Sir Garnet, and don’t you make no mistake. Don’t you⁠—make no mistake.”</p>
				<p>Here <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith gave a very loud hiccup and waved her arms and did not even say ‘beg pardon’ for the offensive noise.</p>
				<p>“Michael,” said Nurse, “go upstairs at once. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith, get up. You ignorant and vulgar woman. Get up.”</p>
				<p>“And you ought to be ashamed of yourself,” said Cook to Nurse. “You old performing monkey, that’s what you are.”</p>
				<p>“Annie,” said Nurse, “fetch a policeman in, and go and get this woman’s box.”</p>
				<p>“Woman!” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith. “Woman yourself. Who’s a woman? I’m not a woman. No, I’m not. And if I am a woman, you’re not the one to say so. Ah, I know how many bottles have gone out of this house and come in⁠—not by me.”</p>
				<p>“Hold your impudent tongue,” said Nurse.</p>
				<p>“I shall not hold my tongue, so now,” retorted <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith.</p>
				<p>Michael had squeezed himself behind the kitchen door fascinated by this duel. It was like Alice in Wonderland, and every minute he expected to see Cook throwing plates at Nanny, who was certainly making faces exactly like the Duchess. The area door slammed, and Michael wondered what was going to happen. Presently there came the sound of a deep tread in the passage and a policeman entered.</p>
				<p>“What’s all this?” he said in a deep voice.</p>
				<p>“Constable,” said Nurse, “will you please remove this dreadful woman?”</p>
				<p>“What’s she been doing?” asked the policeman.</p>
				<p>“She’s drunk.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith apparently overwhelmed by the enormity of the accusation tottered to her feet and seized a saucepan.</p>
				<p>“None of that now,” said the policeman roughly, as he caught her by the waist.</p>
				<p>“Oh, I’m not afraid of a bluebottle,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith haughtily. “Not of a bluebottle, I’m not.”</p>
				<p>“Are you going to charge her?” the policeman asked.</p>
				<p>“No, no. Nothing but turn her out. The girl’s packing her box. Give her the box and let her go.”</p>
				<p>“Not without my wages,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith. “I’m not going to leave my wages behind. Certaintly I’m not.”</p>
				<p>Nurse fumbled in her purse, and at last produced some money.</p>
				<p>“That’s the easiest way,” said the policeman. “Pay her the month and let her go. Come on, my lady.”</p>
				<p>He seized <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith and began to walk her to the door as if she were a heavy sack. Michael began to cry. He did not want <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith to be hurt and he felt frightened. In the passage she suddenly broke loose and, turning round, pushed Nurse into the laundry-basket and was so pleased with her successful effort that she almost ran out of the house and could presently be heard singing very cheerfully ‘White wings, they never grow weary,’ to the policeman. In the end her trunk was pushed down the front-door steps, and after more singing and arguing a four-wheeler arrived and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith vanished for ever from Carlington Road.</p>
				<p>The effect of this scene on Nurse was to make her more repressive and secretive. She was also very severe on vulgarity; and all sorts of old words were wrapped up in new words, as when bread and dripping became bread and honey, because dripping was vulgar. The house grew much gloomier with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frith’s departure. The new cook whose name Michael never found out, because she remained the impersonal official, was very brusque and used to say: “Now then, young man, out of my kitchen or I’ll tell Nurse. And don’t hang about in the passage or in two-twos you’ll be sorry you ever came downstairs.”</p>
				<p>It was autumn again, and the weather was dreary and wet. Michael suffered a severe shock one morning. It was too foggy to go to school and he was sitting alone in the window of the morning-room, staring at the impenetrable and fearful yellowness of the air. Suddenly he heard the cry, ‘Remember, remember the Fifth of November, and gunpowder, treason and plot,’ and, almost before he had time to realize it was the dreaded Guy Fawkes, a band of loud-voiced boys with blackened faces came surging down the area steps and held close to the window a nodding Guy. Michael shrieked with fear and ran from the room, only to be told by Nurse that she’d never heard such old-fashioned nonsense in all her life.</p>
				<p>During that November the fogs were very bad and, as an epidemic term had compelled the Misses Marrow to close their school, Michael brooded at home in the gaslit rooms that shone dully in the street of footsteps. The long morning would drag its length out, and dinner would find no appetite in Michael. Stella seemed not to care to play and would mope with round eyes saddened by this eternal gloom. Dusk was merely marked by the drawing down of the blinds at the clock’s hour without regard to the transit from day to night. Michael used to wonder if it were possible that this fog would last for ever, if for ever he would live in Carlington Road in this yellow twilight, if his mother had forgotten there ever was such a person as Michael Fane. But, at any rate, he would have to grow up. He could not always be the same size. That was a consolation. It was jolly to dream of being grown-up, to plan one’s behaviour and think of freedom. The emancipation of being grown-up seemed to Michael to be a magnificent prospect. To begin with it was no longer possible to be naughty. He realized, indeed, that crimes were a temptation to some grownups, that people of a certain class committed murders and burglaries, but as he felt no inclination to do either, he looked forward to a life of unbroken virtue.</p>
				<p>So far as he could ascertain, grown-up people were exempt from even the necessity to distinguish between good and evil. If Michael examined the Commandments one by one, this became obvious. <q>Thou shalt have none other gods than me.</q> Why should one want to have? One was enough. The Children of Israel must be different from Michael. He could not understand such peculiar people. <q>Make not to thyself any graven image.</q> The only difficulty about this commandment was its length for learning. Otherwise it did not seem to bear on present-day life. <q>Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.</q> This was another vague injunction. Who wanted to? <q>Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath Day.</q> It was obviously a simple matter for grown-up people, who no longer enjoyed playing with toys, to keep this commandment. At present it was difficult to learn and difficult to keep. <q>Honour thy father and thy mother.</q> He loved his mother. He would always love her, even if she forgot him. He might not love her so much as formerly, but he would always love her. <q>Thou shalt do no murder.</q> Michael had no intention of doing murder. Since the Hangman in Punch and Judy he was cured of any inclination towards murder. <q>Thou shalt not commit adultery.</q> Why should he ever want to marry another man’s wife? At present he could not imagine himself married to anybody. He supposed that as one result of growing up he would get married. But, forewarned, he would take care not to choose somebody else’s wife. <q>Thou shalt not steal.</q> With perfect freedom to eat when and where and what one liked, why should one steal? <q>Thou shalt not bear false witness.</q> It would not be necessary to lie when grown up, because one could not then be punished. <q>Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s ox.</q> He would covet nothing, for when he was grown up he would be able to obtain whatever he wanted.</p>
				<p>This desire to be grown up sustained him through much, even through the long foggy nights which made his bedroom more fearfully still than before. The room would hardly seem any longer to exist in the murk which crept through it. The crocus-shaped jet of the gas burned in the vaporous midnight with an unholy flame somehow, thought Michael, as candles must look, when at the approach of ghosts they burn blue. How favourable to crime was fog, how cleverly the thief might steal over the coal-yard at the back of the house and with powerful tools compel the backdoor to open. And the murderers, how they must rejoice in the impenetrable air as with long knives they stole out from distant streets in search of victims. Michael’s nerves were so wrought upon by the unchanging gloom of these wintry days that even to be sent by Nurse to fetch her thimble or workbag before tea was a racking experience.</p>
				<p>“Now then, Michael, run downstairs like a good boy and fetch my needle and cotton which I left in the morning-room,” Nurse would command. And in the gathering dusk Michael would practically slide downstairs until he reached the basement. Then, clutching the object of his errand, he would brace himself for the slower ascent. Suppose that when he reached the hall there were two skeletons sitting on the hall chest? Suppose that on the landing above a number of rats rushed out from the housemaid’s closet to bite his legs and climb over him and gnaw his face? Suppose that from the landing outside his own room a masked burglar were stealing into his room to hide himself under the bed? Suppose that when he arrived back at the day-nursery, Stella and Nurse were lying with their heads chopped off, as he had once seen a family represented by a pink newspaper in the window of a little shop near Hammersmith Broadway? Michael used to reach his goal, white and shaking, and slam the door against the unseen follower who had dogged his footsteps from the coal-cellar. The cries of a London twilight used to oppress him. From the darkening streets and from the twinkling houses inexplicable sounds floated about the air. They had the sadness of church-bells, and like church-bells they could not be located exactly. Michael thought that London was the most melancholy city in the world. Even at Christmastime, behind all the gaiety and gold of a main road lay the trackless streets that were lit, it seemed, merely by pinpoints of gas, so far apart were the lampposts, such a small sad circle of pavement did they illuminate. The rest was shadows and glooms and whispers. Even in the jollity of the pantomime and comfortable smell of well-dressed people the thought of the journey home through the rainy evening brooded upon the gayest scene. The going home was sad indeed, as in the farthest corner of the jolting omnibus they jogged through the darkness. The painted board of places and fares used to depress Michael. He could not bear to think of the possibilities opened up by the unknown names beyond Piccadilly Circus. Once in a list of fares he read the word Whitechapel and shivered at the thought that an omnibus could from Whitechapel pass the corner of Carlington Road. This very omnibus had actually come from the place where murders were done. Murderers might at this moment be travelling in his company. Michael looked askance at the six nodding travellers who sat opposite, at the fumes of their breath, at their hands clasped round the handles of their umbrellas. There, for all he knew, sat Jack the Ripper. It happened that night that one of the travellers, an old gentleman with gold-rimmed eyeglasses, alighted at the corner and actually turned down Carlington Road. Michael was horrified and tugged at Nanny’s arm to make her go faster.</p>
				<p>“Whyever on earth are you dancing along like a bear for? Do you want to go somewhere, you fidgety boy?” said Nurse, pulling Michael to her side with a jerk.</p>
				<p>“Oh, Nanny, there’s a man following us, who got out of our bus.”</p>
				<p>“Well, why shouldn’t he get out? Tut-tut. Other people besides you want to get out of buses. I shan’t ever take you to the pantomime again, if you aren’t careful.”</p>
				<p>“Well, I will be careful,” said Michael, who, perceiving the lamp in their front hall, recovered from his fright and became anxious to propitiate Nanny.</p>
				<p>“So I should think,” muttered Nurse. “Tut-tut-tut-tut-tut.” Michael thought she would never stop clicking her tongue.</p>
				<p>About this time with the fogs and the rain and the loneliness and constant fear that surrounded him, Michael began to feel ill. He worried over his thin arms, comparing them with the sleek Stella’s. His golden hair lost its lustre and became drab and dark and skimpy. His cheeks lost their rose-red, and black lines ringed his large and sombre blue eyes. He cared for little else but reading, and even reading tired him very much, so that once he actually fell asleep over the big <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i>. About two hundred pages were bent underneath the weight of his body, and the book was taken away from him as a punishment for his carelessness. It was placed out of his reach on top of the bookcase and Michael used to stand below and wish for it. No entreaties were well enough expressed to move Nurse; and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Don Quixote</i> remained high out of reach in the dust and shadows of the ceiling. Nurse grew more and more irrational in her behaviour and complained more and more of the neuralgia to which she declared she was a positive martyr. Annie went away into the country because she was ill and a withered housemaid took her place, while the tall thin house in Carlington Road became more grim every day.</p>
				<p>Then a lucky event gave Michael a new interest. Miss Caroline Marrow began to teach him the elements of Botany, and recommended all the boys to procure window-boxes for themselves. Michael told Nurse about this; and, though she muttered and clicked and blew a great deal, one day a bandy-legged man actually came and fitted Michael’s windowsills with two green window-boxes. He spent the whole of his spare time in prodding the sweet new mould, in levelling it and patting it, and filling in unhappy little crevices which had been overlooked. Then on a fine spring morning he paid a visit to the old woman who sold penny packets of seeds, and bought nasturtiums, mignonette, Virginia stocks and candytuft, twelve pansy roots and twelve daisy roots. Michael’s flowers grew and flourished and he loved his window-boxes. He liked to turn towards his window at night now. Somehow those flowers were a protection. He liked to lie in bed during the sparrow-thronged mornings of spring and fancy how the birds must enjoy hopping about in his window-boxes. He was always careful to scatter plenty of crumbs, so that they should not be tempted to peck up his seeds or pull to pieces the pansy buds. He was disappointed that neither the daisies nor the pansies smelt sweet, and when the mignonette bloomed, he almost sniffed it away, so lovely was the perfume of it during the blue days of June. He had a set of gardening tools, so small and suitable to the size of his garden that rake and hoe and spade and fork were all originally fastened to one small square of cardboard.</p>
				<p>But, best of all, when the pansies were still a-blowing and the Virginia stocks were fragrant, and when from his mother’s window below he could see his nasturtium flowers, golden and red and even tortoiseshell against the light, his mother came home suddenly for a surprise, and the house woke up.</p>
				<p>“But you’re not looking well, darling,” she said.</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes, quite well. Quite well,” muttered Nurse, “Quite well. Mustn’t be a mollycoddle. No. No.”</p>
				<p>“I really must see about a nice governess for you,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane. Nurse sniffed ominously.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
