<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 3: The Café d’Orange</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-4-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">The Café d’Orange</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Michael came back to Cheyne Walk with a sense of surprise at finding that it still existed; and when he saw the parlormaid he half expected she would display some emotion at his reappearance. After Neptune Crescent, it was almost impossible to imagine a female who was not subject to the violence of her mutable emotions. Yet her private life, the life of the alternate Sunday evening out, might be as passionate and gusty as any scene in Neptune Crescent. He looked at the tortoise-mouthed parlormaid with a new interest, until she became waxily pink under his stare.</p>
				<p>“<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane is in the drawing-room, sir.” It was as if she were rebuking his observation.</p>
				<p>His mother rose from her desk when he came to greet her.</p>
				<p>“Dearest boy, how delightful to see you again, and so thoughtful of you to send me those postcards.”</p>
				<p>If she had asked him directly where he had been, he would have told her about Neptune Crescent, and possibly even about Lily. But as she did not, he could reveal nothing of the past fortnight. It would have seemed to him like the boring recitation of a dream, which from other people was a confidence he always resented.</p>
				<p>“Stella and Alan are in the studio,” she told him.</p>
				<p>They chatted for a while of unimportant things, and then Michael said he would go and find them. As he crossed the little quadrangle of pallid grass and heard in the distance the sound of the piano he could not keep back the thought of how utterly Alan’s company had replaced his own. Not that he was jealous, not that he was not really delighted; but a period of life was being rounded off. The laws of change were being rather ruthless just now. Both Alan and Stella were so obviously glad to see him that the fleck of bitterness vanished immediately, and he was at their service.</p>
				<p>“Where have you been?” Stella demanded. “We go to Richmond. We send frantic wires to you to join us on the river, and when we come back you’re gone. Where have you been?”</p>
				<p>“I’ve been away,” Michael answered, with a certain amount of embarrassment.</p>
				<p>“My dear old Michael, we never supposed you’d been hiding in the cistern-cupboard for a fortnight,” said Stella, striking three chords of cheerful contempt.</p>
				<p>“I believe he went back to Oxford,” suggested Alan.</p>
				<p>“I am going up tomorrow,” Michael said. “When is your Viva?”</p>
				<p>“Next week. Where are you going to stay?”</p>
				<p>“In college, if I can get hold of a room.”</p>
				<p>“Bother Oxford,” interrupted Stella. “We want to know where you’ve been this fortnight.”</p>
				<p>“You do,” Alan corrected.</p>
				<p>“I’ll tell you both later on,” Michael volunteered. “Just at present I suppose you won’t grudge me a secret. People who are engaged to be married should show a very special altruism toward people who are not.”</p>
				<p>“Michael, I will not have you being important and carrying about a secret with you,” Stella declared.</p>
				<p>“You can manage either me or Alan,” Michael offered. “But you simply shall not manage both of us. Personally, I recommend you to break-in Alan.”</p>
				<p>With evasive banter he succeeded in postponing the revelation of what he was, as Stella said, up to.</p>
				<p>“We’re going in for Herefords,” Alan suddenly announced without consideration for the trend of the talk. “You know. Those white-faced chaps.”</p>
				<p>Michael looked at him in astonishment.</p>
				<p>“I was thinking about this place of Stella’s in Huntingdonshire,” Alan explained. “We went down to see it last week.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, Alan, why did you tell him? He doesn’t deserve to be told.”</p>
				<p>“Is it decent?” Michael asked.</p>
				<p>“Awfully decent,” said Alan. “Rather large, you know.”</p>
				<p>“In fact, we shall belong to the squirearchy,” cried Stella, crashing down upon the piano with the first bars of Chopin’s most exciting Polonaise and from the Polonaise going off into an absurd impromptu recitative.</p>
				<p>“We shall have a dogcart⁠—a high and shining dogcart⁠—and we shall go bowling down the lanes of the county of Hunts⁠—because in books about people who live in the county and of the county and by with or from the county dogcarts invariably bowl⁠—we shall have a herd of Herefordshire bulls and bullocks and bullockesses⁠—and my husband Alan with a straw in his mouth will go every morning with the bailiff to inspect their well-being⁠—and three days every week from November to March we shall go hunting in Huntingdon⁠—and when we aren’t actually hunting in Huntingdon we shall be talking about hunting⁠—and we shall also talk about the Primrose League and the foot-and-mouth disease and the evolutions of the new High Church Vicar⁠—we shall. …”</p>
				<p>But Michael threw a cushion at her, and the recitative came to an end.</p>
				<p>They all three talked for a long while more seriously of plans for life at Hardingham Hall.</p>
				<p>“You know dear old Prescott requested me in his will that I would hyphen his name on to mine, whether I were married or single,” said Stella. “So we shall be <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Prescott-Merivale. Alan has been very good about that, though I think he’s got a dim idea it’s putting on side. Stella Prescott-Merivale or The Curse of the County! And when I play I’m going to be Madame Merivale. I decline to be done out of the Madame! and everybody will pronounce it Marivahleh and I shall receive the unanimous encomia of the critical press.”</p>
				<p>“Life will be rather a rag,” said Michael, with approbation.</p>
				<p>“Of course it’s going to be simply wonderful. Can’t you see the headlines? From Chopin to Sheep. Madame Merivale, the famous Virtuosa, and her Flock of Barbary Long-tails.”</p>
				<p>It was all so very remote from Neptune Crescent, Michael thought. They really were going to be so ridiculously happy, these two, in their country life. And now they were talking of finding him a house close to Hardingham Hall. There must be just that small Georgian house, they vowed, where with a large garden of stately walks and a well-proportioned library of books he could stay in contented retreat. They promised him, too, that beyond the tallest cedar on the lawn a gazebo should command the widest, the greenest expanse of England ever beheld.</p>
				<p>“It would so add to our reputation in the county of Hunts,” said Stella, “if you were near by. We should feel so utterly Augustan. And of course you’d ride a nag. I’m not sure really that you wouldn’t have to wear knee-breeches. I declare, Michael, that the very idea makes me feel like Jane Austen, or do I mean Doctor Johnson?”</p>
				<p>“I should make up your mind which,” Michael advised.</p>
				<p>“But you know what I mean,” she persisted. “The doctor’s wife would come in to tea and tell us that her husband had dug up a mummy or whatever it was the Romans left about. And I should say, ‘We must ask my brother about it. My brother, my dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jumble, will be sure to know. My brother knows everything.’ And she would agree with a pursed-up mouth. ‘Oh, pray do, my dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Prescott-Merivale. Everyone says your brother is a great scholar. It’s such a pleasure to have him at the Lodge. So very distinguished, is it not?’ ”</p>
				<p>“If you’re supposed to be imitating Jane Austen, I may as well tell you at once that it’s not a bit like it.”</p>
				<p>“But I think you ought to come and live near us,” Alan solemnly put in.</p>
				<p>“Of course, my dear, he’s coming,” Stella declared.</p>
				<p>“Of course I’m not,” Michael contradicted. But he was very glad they wanted him; and then he thought with a pang how little they would want him with Lily in that well-proportioned library. How little Lily would enjoy the fat and placid Huntingdon meadows. How little, too, she would care to see the blackbird swagger with twinkling rump by the shrubbery’s edge or hear him scatter the leaves in shrill affright. In the quick vision that came to him of a sleek lawn possessed by birds, Michael experienced his first qualm about the wisdom of what he intended to do.</p>
				<p>“And how about Michael’s wife?” Alan asked.</p>
				<p>Michael looked quite startled by a query so coincident with his own.</p>
				<p>“Oh, of course we shall find someone quite perfect for him,” Stella confidently prophesied.</p>
				<p>“No, really,” said Michael to hide his embarrassment. “I object. Matchmaking ought not to begin during an engagement.”</p>
				<p>Stella paid no heed to the protest, and she began to describe a ladylove who should well become the surroundings in which she intended to place him.</p>
				<p>“I think rather a Quakerish person, don’t you, Alan? Rather neat and tiny with a great sense of humor and. …”</p>
				<p>“In fact, an admirable sick nurse,” Michael interposed, laughing.</p>
				<p>Soon he left them in the studio and went for a walk by the side of the river, thinking, as he strolled in the shade of the plane-trees, how naturally Stella would enter the sphere of English country life now that by fortune the opportunity had been given to her of following in the long line of her ancestors. That she would be able to do so seemed to Michael an additional reason why he should consider less the security of his own future, and he was vexed with himself for that fleeting disloyalty to his task.</p>
				<p>Michael stayed at 202 High for his Viva. He occupied Wedderburn’s old white-paneled room, which he noted with relief was still sacred to the tradition of a carefully chosen decorousness. The Viva was short and irrelevant. He supposed he had obtained a comfortable third, and really it seemed of the utmost unimportance in view of what a gulf now lay between him and Oxford. However, he mustered enough interest to stay in Cheyne Walk until the lists were out, and during those ten days he made no attempt to find Lily.</p>
				<p>Alan got a third in Greats and Michael a first in History. Michael’s immediate emotion was of gladness that Alan had no reason now to feel the disappointment. Then he began to wonder how on earth he had achieved a first. Many letters of congratulation arrived; and one or two of the <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s dons suggested he should try for a fellowship at All Souls. The idea occupied his fancy a good deal, for it was attractive to have anything so remote come suddenly within the region of feasibleness. He would lose nothing by trying for it, and if he succeeded what a congenial existence offered itself. With private means he would be able to divide his time between Oxford and London. There would really be nothing to mar the perfect amenity of the life that seemed to stretch before him. Since he apparently had some talent (he certainly had not worked hard enough to obtain a first without some talent) he would prosecute the study of history. He would make himself famous in a select sort of way. He would become the authority of a minor tributary to the great stream of research. A set of very scholarly, very thorough works would testify to his reputation. There were plenty of archaic problems still to be solved. He cast a proprietary glance over the centuries, and he had almost decided to devote himself to the service of Otto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> and Sylvester <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, when in a moment the thought of Lily, sweeping as visibly before his mind as the ghost in an Elizabethan play, made every kind of research into the past seem a waste of resolution. He tore up the congratulatory letters and decided to let the future wait a while. This pursuit of Lily was a mad business, no doubt, but to come to grips with the present called for a certain amount of madness.</p>
				<p>Alan remonstrated with him, when he heard that he had no intention of trying for All Souls.</p>
				<p>“You are an extraordinary chap. You were always grumbling when you were up that you didn’t know what you ought to do, and now when it’s perfectly obvious you won’t make the slightest attempt to do it.”</p>
				<p>“Used I to grumble?” asked Michael.</p>
				<p>“Well, not exactly grumble. But you were always asking theoretical questions which had no answer,” said Alan severely.</p>
				<p>“What if I told you I’d found an answer to a great many of them?”</p>
				<p>“Ever since I’ve been engaged to Stella you’ve found it necessary to be very mysterious. What are you playing at, Michael?”</p>
				<p>“It’s imaginable, don’t you think, that I might be making up my mind to do something which I considered more vital for me than a fellowship at All Souls?”</p>
				<p>“But it seems so obvious after your easy first that you should clinch it.”</p>
				<p>“I tell you it was a fluke.”</p>
				<p>“My third wasn’t a fluke,” said Alan. “I worked really hard for it.”</p>
				<p>“Thirds and firsts are equally unimportant in the long run,” Michael argued. “You have already fitted into your place with the most complete exactitude. There’s no dimension in your future that can possibly trouble you. Supposing I get this fellowship? It will either be too big for me, in which case I shall have to be perpetually puffing out my frills and furbelows to make a pretense of filling it, or it will be too small, and I shall have to pare down my very soul in order to squeeze into it most uncomfortably.”</p>
				<p>“You’ll never do anything,” Alan prophesied. “Because you’ll always be doubting.”</p>
				<p>“I might get rid finally of that sense of insecurity,” Michael pointed out. “With all doubts and hesitations I’m perfectly convinced of one great factor in human life⁠—the necessity to follow the impulse which lies deeper than any reason. Reason is the enemy of civilization. Reason carried to the <i>n</i>th power can always with absurd ease be debauched by sentiment, and sentiment is mankind’s wretched little lament for disobeying impulse. Women preserve this divinity because they are irrational. The New Woman claims equality with man because she claims to be as reasonable as men. She has fixed on voting for a Member of Parliament as the medium to display her reasonableness. The franchise is to be endowed with a sacramental significance. If the New Women win, they will degrade themselves to the slavery of modern men. But of course they won’t win, because God is so delightfully irrational. By the way, it’s worth noting that the peculiar vestment with which popular fancy has clothed the New Woman is called rational costume. You often hear of ‘rationals’ as a synonym for breeches. What was I saying? Oh, yes, about God being irrational. You never know what he’ll do next. He is a dreadful problem for rationalists. That’s why they have abolished him.”</p>
				<p>“You’re confusing two different kinds of reason,” said Alan. “What you call impulse⁠—unless your impulse is mere madness⁠—is what I might call reason.”</p>
				<p>“In that case I recommend you as a philosopher to set about the reconstruction of your terminology. I’m not a philosopher, and therefore I’ve given this vague generic name ‘impulse’ to something which deserves, such a powerful and infallible and overmastering impetus does it give to conduct, a very long name indeed.”</p>
				<p>“But if you’re going through life depending on impulse,” Alan objected, “you’ll be no better off than a weathercock. You can’t discount reason in this way. You must admit that our judgments are modified by experience.”</p>
				<p>“The chief thing we learn from experience is to place upon it no reliance whatever.”</p>
				<p>“It’s no good arguing with you,” Alan said. “Because what you call impulse I call reason, and what you call reason I call imperfect logic.”</p>
				<p>“Alan, I can’t believe you only got a third. For really, you know, your conversation is a model of the philosophic manner. Anyway, I’m not going to try to be a Fellow of All Souls and you are going to be a country squire. Let’s hold on to what certainties we can.”</p>
				<p>Michael would have liked to lead him into a discussion of the problem of evil, so that he might ascertain if Alan had ever felt the intimations of evil which had haunted his own perceptions. However, he thought he had tested to the utmost that third in Greats, and therefore he refrained.</p>
				<p>There was a discussion that evening about going away. August was already in sight and arrangements must be made quickly to avoid the burden of it in London. In the end, it was arranged that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane and Stella and Alan should go to Scotland, where Michael promised to join them, if he could get away from London.</p>
				<p>“If you can get away!” Stella scoffed. “What rot you do talk.”</p>
				<p>But Michael was not to be teased out of his determination to stay where he was, and in three or four days he said goodbye to the others northward bound, waving to them from the steps of 173 Cheyne Walk on which already the August sun was casting a heavy heat untempered by the stagnant sheen of the Thames.</p>
				<p>That evening Michael went again to the Orient Promenade; but there was no sign of Lily, and it seemed likely that she had gone away from London for a while. After the performance he visited the Café d’Orange in Leicester Square. He had never been there yet, but he had often noticed the riotous exodus at half-past twelve, and he argued from the quality of the frequenters who stood wrangling on the pavement that the Café d’Orange would be a step lower than any of the night-resorts he had so far attended. He scarcely expected to find Lily here. Indeed, he was rather inclined to think that she was someone’s mistress and that Drake’s view of her at the Orient did not argue necessarily that she had yet sunk to the promiscuous livelihood of the Promenade.</p>
				<p>Downstairs at the Café d’Orange was rather more like a corner of hell than Michael had anticipated. The tobacco smoke which could not rise in these subterranean airs hung in a blue murk round the gaudy hats and vile faces, while from the roof the electric lamps shone dazzlingly down and made a patchwork of light and shade and color. In a corner left by the sweep of the stairs a quartet of unkempt musicians in seamy tunics of beer-stained scarlet frogged with debilitated braid were grinding out ragtime. The noisy tune in combination with the talking and laughter, the chink of glasses and the shouted acknowledgments of the waiters made such a din that Michael stood for a moment in confusion, debating the possibility of one more person threading his way through the serried tables to a seat.</p>
				<p>There were three arched recesses at the opposite end of the room, and in one of these he thought he could see a table with a vacant place. So paying no heed to the women who hailed him on the way he moved across and sat down. A waiter pounced upon him voraciously for orders, and soon with an unrequited drink he was meditating upon the scene before him in that state of curious tranquillity which was nearly always induced by ceaseless circumfluent clamor. Sitting in this tunnel-shaped alcove, he seemed to be in the box of a theater whence the actions and voices of the contemplated company had the unreality of an operatic finale. After a time the various groups and individuals were separated in his mind, so that in their movements he began to take an easily transferred interest, endowing them with pleasant or unpleasant characteristics in turn. Round him in the alcove there were strange contrasts of behavior. At one table four offensive youths were showing off with exaggerated laughter for the benefit of nobody’s attention. Behind them in the crepuscule of two broken lamps a leaden-lidded girl; ivory white and cloying the air with her heavy perfume, was arguing in low passionate tones with a cold-eyed listener who with a straw was tracing niggling hieroglyphics upon a moist surface of cigarette-ash. In the deepest corner a girl with a high complexion and bright eyes was making ardent love to a partially drunk and bearded man, winking the while over her shoulder at whoever would watch her comedy. The other places were filled by impersonal women who sipped from their glasses without relish and stared disdainfully at each other down their powdered noses. At Michael’s own table was a blotchy man who alternately sucked his teeth and looked at his watch; and immediately opposite sat a girl with a merry, audacious and somewhat pale face of the Gallic type under a very large and round black hat trimmed with daisies. She was twinkling at Michael, but he would not catch her eye, and he looked steadily over the brim of her hat toward the raffish and rutilant assemblage beyond. Along two sides of the wall were large mirrors painted with flowers and bloated Naiads; here in reflection the throng performed its antics in numberless reduplications. Advertisements of drink decorated the rest of the space on the walls, and at intervals hung notices warning ladies that they must not stay longer than twenty minutes unless accompanied by a gentleman, that they must not move to another table unless accompanied by a gentleman, and with a final stroke of ironic propriety that they must not smoke unless accompanied by a gentleman. The tawdry beer hall with its reek of alcohol and fog of tobacco smoke, with its harborage of all the flotsam of the underworld, must preserve a fiction of polite manners.</p>
				<p>Michael was not allowed to maintain his attitude of disinterested commentary, for the girl in the daisied hat presently addressed him, and he did not wish to hurt her feelings by not replying.</p>
				<p>“You’re very silent, kiddie,” she said. “I’ll give you a penny for them.”</p>
				<p>“I really wasn’t thinking about anything in particular,” said Michael. “Will you have a drink?”</p>
				<p>“Don’t mind if I do. Alphonse!” she shouted, tugging at the arm of the overloaded waiter who was accomplishing his transit. “Bring me a hot whisky-and-lemon. There’s a love.”</p>
				<p>Alphonse made the slightest sign of having heard the request and passed on. Michael held his breath while the girl was giving her order. He was expecting every moment that the waiter would break over the alcove in a fountain of glass.</p>
				<p>“I’ve taken quite a fancy to whisky-and-lemon hot,” she informed Michael. “You know. Anyone does, don’t they? Get a sudden fit and keep on keeping on with one drink, I mean. This’ll be my sixth tonight. But I’m a long way off being drunk, kiddie. Do you like my new hat? I reckon it’ll bring me luck.”</p>
				<p>“I expect it will,” Michael said.</p>
				<p>“You are serious, aren’t you? When I first saw you I thought you was the spitting image of a fellow I know⁠—Bert Saunders, who writes about the boxing matches for <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Crime Illustrated</i>. He’s more of a bright-eyes than you are, though.”</p>
				<p>The whisky-and-lemon arrived, and she drank Michael’s health.</p>
				<p>“Funny-tasting stuff when you come to think of it,” she said meditatingly. “What’s your name, kiddie?”</p>
				<p>He told her.</p>
				<p>“Michael,” she repeated. “You’re a Jew, then?”</p>
				<p>He shook his head.</p>
				<p>“Well, kid, I suppose you know best, but Michael is a Jewish name, isn’t it? Michael? Of course it is. I don’t mind Jew fellows myself. One or two of them have been very good to me. My name’s Daisy Palmer.”</p>
				<p>The conversation languished slightly, because Michael since his encounter with Poppy at Neptune Crescent was determined to be very cautious.</p>
				<p>“You look rather French,” was his most audacious sally toward the personal.</p>
				<p>“Funny you should have said that, because my mother was a stewardess on the Calais boat. She was Belgian herself.”</p>
				<p>Again the conversation dropped.</p>
				<p>“I’m waiting for a friend,” Daisy volunteered. “She’s been having a row with her fellow, and she promised to come on down to the Orange and tell me about it. Dolly Wearne is her name. She ought to have been here by now. What’s the time, kid?”</p>
				<p>It was after midnight, and Daisy began to look round anxiously.</p>
				<p>“I’m rather worried over Doll,” she confided to Michael, “because this fellow of hers, Hungarian Dave, is a proper little tyke when he turns nasty. I said to Doll, I said to her, ‘Doll, that dirty rotter you’re so soft over’ll swing for you before he’s done. Why don’t you leave him,’ I said, ‘and come and live along with me for a bit?’ ”</p>
				<p>“And what did she say?” Michael asked.</p>
				<p>But there was no answer, for Daisy had caught sight of Dolly herself coming down the stairs, and she was now hailing her excitedly.</p>
				<p>“Oh, doesn’t she look shocking white,” exclaimed Daisy. “Doll!” she shouted, waving to her. “Over here, duck.”</p>
				<p>The four offensive youths near them in the alcove mimicked her in exaggerated falsetto.</p>
				<p>“⁠⸻ to you,” she flung scornfully at them over her shoulder. There was a savage directness, a simple coarseness in the phrase that pleased Michael. It seemed to him that nothing except that could ever be said to these young men. Whatever else might be urged against the Café d’Orange, at least one was able to hear there a final verdict on otherwise indescribable humanity.</p>
				<p>By this time Dolly Wearne, a rather heavy girl with a long retreating chin and flabby cheeks, had reached her friend’s side. She began immediately a voluble tale:</p>
				<p>“Oh, Daisy, I put it across him straight. I give you my word, I told him off so as he could hardly look me in the face. ‘You call yourself a man,’ I said, ‘why, you dirty little alien.’ That’s what I called him. I did straight, ‘you dirty little⁠—’ ”</p>
				<p>“This is my friend,” interrupted Daisy, indicating Michael, who bowed. It amused him to see how in the very middle of what was evidently going to be a breathless and desperate story both the girls could remember the convention of their profession.</p>
				<p>“Pleased to meet you,” said Dolly, offering a black kid-gloved hand with half-a-simper.</p>
				<p>“What will you drink?” asked Michael.</p>
				<p>“Mine’s a brandy and soda, please. ‘You dirty little alien,’ I said.” Dolly was helter-skelter in the track of her tale again.</p>
				<p>“Go on, did you? And what did he say?” asked Daisy admiringly.</p>
				<p>“He never said nothing, my dear. What could he say?”</p>
				<p>“That’s right,” nodded Daisy wisely.</p>
				<p>“ ‘For two years,’ I said, ‘you’ve let a girl keep you,’ I said, ‘and then you can go and give one of my rings to that Florrie. Let me get hold of her,’ I said. ‘I’ll tear her eyes out.’ ‘No, you won’t, now then,’ he said. ‘Won’t I? I will, then,’ and with that I just lost control of my feelings, I felt that wild. …”</p>
				<p>“What did you do, Doll?” asked Daisy, plying her with brandy to soothe the outraged memory.</p>
				<p>“What did I do? Why, I spat in his tea and came straight off down to the Orange. ‘Yes,’ I said, ‘you can sit drinking tea while you break my heart.’ Don’t you ever go and have a fancy boy, Daise. Why, I was a straight girl when I first knew him. Straight⁠—well, anyway not on the game like what I am now.” Here Dolly Wearne began to weep with bitter self-compassion. “I’ve slaved for that fellow, and now he serves me like dirt.”</p>
				<p>“Go on. Don’t cry, duck,” Daisy begged. “Come home with me tonight and we can send and fetch your things away tomorrow. I wouldn’t cry over him,” she said fiercely. “There’s no fellow worth crying over. The best of them isn’t worth crying over.”</p>
				<p>The four offensive youths in the alcove began to mock Dolly’s tears, and Michael, who was already bitten with some of the primitive pugnacity of the underworld, rose to attack them.</p>
				<p>“Sit down,” Daisy commanded. “I wouldn’t mess my hands, if I was you, with such a pack of filth. Sit down, you stupid boy. You’ll get us all into trouble.”</p>
				<p>Michael managed by a great effort to resume his seat, but for a minute or two he saw the beerhall through a mist of rage.</p>
				<p>Gradually Dolly’s tears ceased to flow, and after another brandy she became merely more abusive of the faithless Dave. Her cheeks swollen with crying seemed flabbier than ever, and her long retreating chin expressed a lugubrious misanthropy.</p>
				<p>“Rotten, I call it, don’t you?” said the sympathetic Daisy, appealing to Michael.</p>
				<p>He agreed with a profound nod.</p>
				<p>“And she’s been that good to him. You wouldn’t believe.”</p>
				<p>Michael thought it was rather risky to embark upon an enumeration of Dolly’s virtuous acts. He feared another relapse into noisy grief.</p>
				<p>At this moment the subject of Daisy’s eulogy rose from her seat and stared very dramatically at a corner of the main portion of the beerhall.</p>
				<p>“My God!” she said, with ominous calm.</p>
				<p>“What is it, duck?” asked Daisy, anxiously peering.</p>
				<p>“My God!” Daisy repeated intensely. Then suddenly she poured forth a volley of obloquy, and with an hysterical scream caught up her glass evidently intending to hurl it in the direction of her abuse. Daisy seized one arm: Michael gripped the other, and together they pulled her back into her chair. She was still screaming loudly, and the noise of the beerhall, hitherto scattered and variable in pitch, concentrated in a low murmur of interest. Round about them in the alcove the neighbors began to listen: the girl who had been arguing so passionately with the cold-eyed man stopped and stared; the partially drunk and bearded man collapsed into a glassy indifference, while his charmer no longer winked over her shoulder at the spectators of her wooing; the four offensive youths gaped like landed trout; even the blotchy-faced man ceased to look at his watch and confined himself to sucking steadily his teeth.</p>
				<p>It seemed probable, Michael thought, that there was going to be rather a nasty row. Dolly would not listen to persuasion from him or her friend. She was going to attack that Florrie; she was going to mark that Florrie for life with a glass; she was going to let her see if she could come it over Doll Wearne. It would take more than Florrie to do that; yes, more than half-a-dozen Florries, it would.</p>
				<p>The manager of the Orange had been warned, and he was already edging his way slowly toward the table. The friends of Florrie were using their best efforts to remove her from the temptation to retaliate. Though she declared loudly that nothing would make her quit the Orange, and certainly that Dolly less than anybody, she did suffer herself to be coaxed away.</p>
				<p>Dolly, when she found her rival had retreated, burst into tears again and was immediately surrounded by a crowd of inquisitive sympathizers, which made her utterly hysterical. Michael, without knowing quite how it had happened, found that he was involved in the fortunes and enmities and friendships of a complete society. He found himself explaining to several bystanders the wrong which Dolly had been compelled to endure at the hands of Hungarian Dave. It was extraordinary how suddenly this absurd intrigue of the underworld came to seem tremendously important. He felt that all his sense of proportion was rapidly disappearing. In the middle of an excited justification of Dolly’s tears he was aware that he and his surroundings and his attitude were to himself incredible. He was positively in a nightmare, and a prey to the inconsequence of dreams. Or was all his life until this moment a dream, and was this reality? One fact alone presented itself clearly, which was the necessity to see the miserable Dolly safely through the rest of the evening. He felt very reliant upon Daisy, who was behaving with admirable composure, and when he asked her advice about the course of action, he agreed at once with her that Dolly must be persuaded into a cab and be allowed in Daisy’s rooms in Guilford Street a freedom of rage and grief that was here, such was the propriety of the Orange, a very imprudent display of emotion.</p>
				<p>“She’ll be barred from coming down here,” said Daisy. “Come on, let’s get her home.”</p>
				<p>“Where’s that Florrie?” screamed Dolly.</p>
				<p>“She’s gone home. So what’s the use in your carrying on so mad? The manager’s got his eye on us, Doll. Come on, Doll, let’s get on home. I tell you the manager’s looking at us. You are a silly girl.”</p>
				<p>“⁠⸻ the manager,” said Dolly obstinately. “Let him look.”</p>
				<p>“Why don’t you come and see if you can find Florrie outside?” Daisy suggested.</p>
				<p>Dolly was moved by this proposal, and presently she agreed to vacate the Orange, much to Michael’s relief, for he was expecting every moment to see her attack the manager with the match-stand that was fretting her fingers. As it happened, Daisy’s well-meant suggestion was very unlucky because Hungarian Dave, the cause of all the bother, was standing on the pavement close to the entrance.</p>
				<p>Daisy whispered to Michael to get a cab quickly, because Hungarian Dave was close at hand. He looked at him curiously, this degraded individual in whose domestic affairs he was now so deeply involved. A very objectionable creature he was, too, with his greasy hair and large red mouth. His cap was pulled down over the eyes, and he may have wished not to be seen; but an instinct for his presence made Dolly turn round, and in a moment she was in the thick of the delight of telling him off for the benefit of a crowd increasing with every epithet she flung. It was useless now to attempt to get her away, and Michael and Daisy could only drag her back when she seemed inclined to attack him with fingernails or hatpin.</p>
				<p>“Get a cab,” cried Daisy. “Never mind what she says. Get a cab, and we’ll put the silly thing into it and drive off. The coppers will be here in a moment.”</p>
				<p>Michael managed to hail a hansom immediately, but when he turned back to the scene of the pavement the conditions of the dispute were entirely changed. Hungarian Dave, infuriated or frightened, had knocked Dolly down, and she was just staggering to her feet, when a policeman stepped into the circle.</p>
				<p>“Come on, move along,” he growled.</p>
				<p>The bully had merged himself in the ring of onlookers, and Dolly, with a cry of fury, flung herself in his direction.</p>
				<p>“Stop that, will you?” the policeman said savagely, seizing her by the arm.</p>
				<p>“Go on, it’s a dirty shame,” cried Daisy. “Why don’t you take the fellow as knocked her down?”</p>
				<p>Michael by this time had forced his way through the crowd, rage beating upon his brain like a great scarlet hammer.</p>
				<p>“You infernal ass,” he shouted to the constable. “Haven’t you got the sense to see that this woman was attacked first? Where is the blackguard who did it?” he demanded of the stupid, the gross, the vilely curious press of onlookers. No one came forward to support him, and Hungarian Dave had slipped away.</p>
				<p>“Move on, will you?” the policeman repeated.</p>
				<p>“Damn you,” cried Michael. “Will you let go of that woman’s arm?”</p>
				<p>The constable with a bovine density of purpose proceeded apparently to arrest the wretched Dolly, and Michael maddened by his idiocy felt that the only thing to do was to hit him as hard as he could. This he did. The constable immediately blew his whistle. Other masses of inane bulk loomed up, and Michael was barely able to control himself sufficiently not to resist all the way to Vine Street, as two of them marched him along, and four more followed with Daisy and Dolly. A spumy trail of nocturnal loiterers clung to their wake.</p>
				<p>Next morning Michael appeared before the magistrate. He listened to the charge against him and nearly laughed aloud in court, because the whole business so much resembled the trial in Alice in Wonderland. It was not that the magistrate was quite so illogical as the King of Hearts; but he was so obviously biased in favor of the veracity of a London policeman, that the inconsequence of the nightmare which had begun last night was unalterably preserved. Michael, aware of the circumstances which had led up to what was being made to appear as wantonly riotous behavior in Leicester Square, could not fail to be exasperated by the inability of the magistrate to understand his own straightforward story. He began to sympathize with the lawless population. The law could only seem to them an unintelligent machine for crushing their freedom. If the conduct of this case were a specimen of administration, it was obvious that arrest must be synonymous with condemnation. The magistrate in the first place seemed dreadfully overcome by the sorrow of beholding a young man in Michael’s position on the police-court.</p>
				<p>“I cannot help wondering when I see a young man who has had every opportunity …” the magistrate went on in a voice that worked on the stale air of the court like a rusty file.</p>
				<p>“I’m not a defaulting bank clerk,” Michael interrupted. “Is it impossible for you to understand⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Don’t speak to me like that. Keep quiet. I’ve never been spoken to like that in all my experience as a magistrate. Keep quiet.”</p>
				<p>Michael sighed in compassion for his age and stupidity.</p>
				<p>“Are there any previous convictions against Wearne and Palmer?” the magistrate inquired. He was told that the woman Palmer had not hitherto appeared, but that Wearne had been previously fined for disorderly conduct in Shaftesbury Avenue. “Ah!” said the magistrate. “Ah!” he repeated, looking over the rim of his glasses. “And the case against the male defendant? I will take the evidence of Constable C11254.”</p>
				<p>“Your worship, I was on duty yesterday evening at 12:25 in Leicester Square. Hearing a noise in the direction of the Caffy Dorringe and observing a crowd collect, I moved across the road to disperse it. The defendant Wearne was using obscene language to an unknown man; and wishing to get her to move on I took hold of her arm. The male defendant, also using very obscene language, attempted to rescue her and struck me on the chest. I blew my whistle. …”</p>
				<p>The ponderous constable with his thick red neck continued a singsong narrative.</p>
				<p>When Michael’s turn came to refute some of the evidence against him, he merely shrugged his shoulders.</p>
				<p>“It’s really useless, you know, for me to say anything. If ‘damn you’ is obscene, then I was obscene. If a girl is knocked down by a bully and on rising to her feet is instantly arrested by a dunderhead in a blue uniform, and if an onlooker punches this functionary, then I did assault the constable.”</p>
				<p>“This sort of insolence won’t do,” said the magistrate trembling with a curious rarefied passion. “I have a very good mind to send you to prison without the option of a fine, but in consideration. …”</p>
				<p>Somehow or other it was made to appear a piece of extraordinary magnanimity on the part of the magistrate that Michael was only fined three guineas and costs.</p>
				<p>“I wish to pay the fines of Miss Palmer and Miss Wearne,” he announced.</p>
				<p>Later in the morning Michael, with the two girls, emerged into the garish summer day. Not even yet was the illusion of a nightmare dissipated, for as he looked at his two companions, feathered, frilled and bedraggled, who were walking beside him, he could scarcely acknowledge even their probable reality here in the sun.</p>
				<p>“I shan’t drink hot whisky-and-lemon again in a hurry,” vowed Daisy. “I knew it was going to bring me bad luck when I said it tasted so funny.”</p>
				<p>“But you said your hat was going to be lucky,” Michael pointed out.</p>
				<p>“Yes, I’ve been properly sucked in over that,” Daisy agreed.</p>
				<p>“Nothing ever brings me luck,” grumbled Dolly resentfully.</p>
				<p>As Michael looked at the long retreating chin and down-drawn mouth he was inclined to agree that nothing could invigorate this fatal mournfulness with the prospect of good fortune.</p>
				<p>“I reckon I’ll go home and have a good lay down,” said Daisy. “Are you going to have dinner with me?” she asked, turning to Dolly.</p>
				<p>“Dinner?” echoed Dolly. “Nice time to talk to anyone about their dinner, when they’ve got the sick like I have! Dinner!”</p>
				<p>They had reached Piccadilly Circus by now, and Michael wondered if he might not put them into a cab and send them back to Guilford Street. He found it embarrassing when the people slowly turned away from Swan and Edgar’s window to stare instead at him and his companions.</p>
				<p>Daisy pressed him to come back with them, but he promised he would call upon her very soon. Then he slipped into her hand the change from the second five-pound note into which the law had broken.</p>
				<p>“Is this for us?” she asked.</p>
				<p>He nodded.</p>
				<p>“You are a sport. Mind you come and see us. Come to tea. Doll’s going to live with me a bit now, aren’t you, Doll?”</p>
				<p>“I suppose so,” said Doll.</p>
				<p>Michael really admired the hospitality which was willing to shelter this lugubrious girl, and as he contemplated her, looking in the sunlight like a moist handkerchief, he had a fleeting sympathy with Hungarian Dave.</p>
				<p>When the girls had driven off, Michael recovered his ordinary appearance by visiting a barber and a hosier. The effect of the shampoo was almost to make him incredulous of the night’s event, and he could not help paying a visit to the Café d’Orange, to verify the alcove in which he had sat. The entrance of the beerhall was closed, however, and he stood for a moment like a person who passes a theater which the night before he has seen glittering. As Michael was going out of the bar, he thought he recognized a figure leaning over the counter. Yes, it was certainly Meats. He went up and tapped him on the shoulder, addressing him by name. Meats turned round with a start.</p>
				<p>“Don’t you remember me?” asked Michael.</p>
				<p>“Of course I do,” said Meats nervously. “But for the love of Jerusalem drop calling me by that name. Here, let’s go outside.”</p>
				<p>In the street Michael asked him why he had given up being Meats.</p>
				<p>“Oh, a bit of trouble, a bit of trouble,” said Meats.</p>
				<p>“You are a strange chap,” said Michael. “When I first met you it was Brother Aloysius. Then it was Meats. Now⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Look here,” said Meats, “give over, will you? I’ve told you once. If you call me that again I shall leave you. Barnes is what I am now. Now don’t forget.”</p>
				<p>“Come and have a drink, and tell me what you’ve been doing in the four years since we met,” Michael suggested.</p>
				<p>“B-a-r-n-e-s. Have you got it?”</p>
				<p>Michael assured him that everything but Barnes as applicable to him had vanished from his mind.</p>
				<p>“Come on, then,” said Barnes. “We’ll go into the Afrique, upstairs.”</p>
				<p>Michael fancied he had met Barnes this time in a reincarnation that was causing him a good deal of uneasiness. He had lost the knowingness which had belonged to Meats and the sheer lasciviousness which had seemed the predominant quality of Brother Aloysius. Instead, sitting at the round marble table opposite Michael saw an individual who resembled an actor out of work in the lowest grades of his profession. There was the cheesy complexion, and the over-fashioned suit of another season too much worn and faded now to flaunt itself objectionably, but with its dismoded exaggerations still conveying an air of rococo smartness; perhaps, thought Michael, these signs had always been obvious and it had merely been his own youth which had supposed a type to be an exception. Certainly Barnes could not arouse now anything but a compassionate amusement. How this figure with its grotesque indignity as of a puppet temporarily put out of action testified to his own morbid heightening of common things in the past. How incredible it seemed now that this Barnes had once been able to work upon his soul with influential doctrine.</p>
				<p>“What have you been doing with yourself?” Michael asked again.</p>
				<p>“Oh, hopping and popping about. I’ve got the rats at present.”</p>
				<p>“Where are you living?”</p>
				<p>Barnes looked at Michael in suspicious astonishment. “What do you want to know for?” he asked.</p>
				<p>“Mere inquisitiveness,” Michael assured him. “You really needn’t treat me like a detective, you know.”</p>
				<p>“My mistake,” said Barnes. “But really, Fane. Let’s see, that is your name? Thought it was. I don’t often forget a name. No, without swank, Fane, I’ve been hounded off my legs lately. I’m living in Leppard Street. Pimlico way.”</p>
				<p>“I’d like to come and see you some time,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>“Here, straight, what <em>is</em> your game?” Barnes could not conceal his suspicion.</p>
				<p>“Inquisitiveness,” Michael declared again. “Also I rather want a Sancho Panza.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, of course, any little thing I can do to oblige,” said Barnes very sarcastically.</p>
				<p>It took Michael a long time to convince him that no plot was looming, but at last he persuaded him to come to 173 Cheyne Walk, and after that he knew that Barnes could not refuse to show him Leppard Street.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
