<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 5: Incense</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-5" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Incense</span>
				</h2>
				<p>Stella came back from Germany less foreign-looking than Michael expected, and he could take a certain amount of pleasure in her company at Bournemouth, For a time they were well matched, as they walked with their mother under the pines. Once, as they passed a bunch of old ladies on a seat, Stella said to Michael:</p>
				<p>“Did you hear what those people said?”</p>
				<p>Michael had not heard, so Stella whispered:</p>
				<p>“They said ‘What good-looking children!’ Shall we turn back and walk by them again?”</p>
				<p>“Whatever for?” Michael demanded.</p>
				<p>“Oh, I don’t know,” said Stella, flapping the big violet bows in her chestnut hair. “Only I like to hear people talking about me. I think it’s interesting. I always try to hear what they say when I’m playing.”</p>
				<p>“Mother,” Michael appealed, “don’t you think Stella ought not to be so horribly conceited? I do.”</p>
				<p>“Darling Stella,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane, “I’m afraid people spoil her. It isn’t her fault.”</p>
				<p>“It must be her fault,” argued Michael.</p>
				<p>Michael remembered Miss Carthew’s admonition not to snub Stella, but he could not help feeling that Miss Carthew herself would have disapproved of this open vanity. He wished that Miss Carthew were not now <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross and far away in Edinburgh. He felt almost a responsibility with regard to Stella, a highly moral sensation of knowing better the world and its pitfalls than she could. He feared for the effect of its lure upon Stella and her vanity, and was very anxious his sister should always comport herself with credit to her only brother. In his mother’s attitude Michael seemed to discern a dangerous inclination not to trouble about Stella’s habit of thought. He resolved, when he and Stella were alone together, to address his young sister seriously. Stella’s nonchalance alarmed him more and more deeply as he began to look back at his own life and to survey his wasted years. Michael felt he must convince Stella that earnestness was her only chance.</p>
				<p>“You’re growing very fast, Michael,” said his mother one morning. “Really I think you’re getting too big for Etons.”</p>
				<p>Michael critically examined himself in his mother’s toilet-glass and had to admit that his sleeves looked short and that his braces showed too easily under his waistcoat. The fact that he could no longer survey his reflection calmly and that he dreaded to see Stella admire herself showed him something was wrong.</p>
				<p>“Perhaps I’d better get a new suit,” he suggested.</p>
				<p>In his blue serge suit, wearing what the shops called a Polo or Shakespeare collar, Michael felt more at ease, although the sleeves were now as much too long as lately his old sleeves were too short. The gravity of this new suit confirmed his impression that age was stealing upon him and made him the more inclined to lecture Stella. This desire of his seemed to irritate his mother, who would protest:</p>
				<p>“Michael, do leave poor Stella alone. I can’t think why you’ve suddenly altered. One would think you’d got the weight of the world on your shoulders.”</p>
				<p>“Like Atlas,” commented Michael gloomily.</p>
				<p>“I don’t know who it’s like,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane. “But it’s very disagreeable for everybody round you.”</p>
				<p>“Michael always thinks he knows about everything,” Stella put in spitefully.</p>
				<p>“Oh, shut up!” growled Michael.</p>
				<p>He was beginning to feel that his mother admired Stella more than himself, and the old jealousy of her returned. He was often reproved for being untidy and, although he was no longer inky and grubby, he did actually find that his hair refused to grow neatly and that he was growing clumsy both in manners and appearance. Stella always remained cool and exasperatingly debonair under his rebukes, whereas he felt himself growing hot and awkward. The old self-consciousness had returned and with it two warts on his finger and an intermittent spot on his chin. Also a down was visible on his face that somehow blunted his profile and made him more prone than ever to deprecate the habit of admiring oneself in a looking-glass. He felt impelled to untie Stella’s violet bows whenever he caught her posing before the mirror, and as the holidays advanced he and she grew less and less well matched. The old worrying speculation about his father returned together with a wish that his mother would not dress in such gay colours. Michael admired her slimness and tallness, but he wished that men would not turn round and stare at her as she passed them. He used to stare back at the men with a set frowning face and try to impress them with his distaste for their manners; but day by day he grew more miserable about his mother, and would often seek to dissuade her from what he considered a too conspicuous hat or vivid ribbon. She used to laugh and tell him that he was a regular old ‘provincial.’ The opportunity for perfect confidence between Michael and his mother seemed to have slipped by, and he found it impossible now to make her talk about his father. To be sure, she no longer tried to wave aside his enquiries; but she did worse by answering ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to his questions according to her mood, never seeming to care whether she contradicted a previous statement or not.</p>
				<p>Once, Michael asked straight out whether his father was in prison and he was relieved when his mother rippled with laughter and told him he was a stupid boy. At the same time, since he had been positively assured his father was dead, Michael felt that laughter, however convincing it were, scarcely became a widow.</p>
				<p>“I cannot think what has happened to you, Michael. You were perfectly charming all last term and never seemed to have a moment on your hands. Now you hang about the house on these lovely fine days and mope and grumble. I do wish you could enjoy yourself as you used to.”</p>
				<p>“Well, I’ve got no friends down here,” Michael declared. “What is there to do? I’m sick of the band, and the niggers are rotten, and Stella always wants to hang about on the pier so that people can stare at her. I wish she’d go back to her glorious Germany where everything is so wonderful.”</p>
				<p>“Why don’t you read? You used to love reading,” suggested <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane.</p>
				<p>“Oh, read!” exclaimed Michael. “There’s nothing to read. I hate Henty. Always the same!”</p>
				<p>“Well, I don’t know anything about Henty, but there’s Scott and Dickens and⁠⸺”</p>
				<p>“I’ve read all them, mother,” Michael interrupted petulantly.</p>
				<p>“Well, why don’t you ask <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rewins if you can borrow a book from her, or I’ll ask her, as you don’t like going downstairs.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rewins brought up an armful of books which Michael examined dismally one by one. However, after several gilded volumes of sermons and sentimental Sunday-school prizes, he came across a tattered Newgate Calendar and Roderick Random, both of which satisfied somewhat his new craving for excitement. When he had finished these books, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rewins invited him to explore the cupboard in her warm kitchen, and here Michael found Peregrine Pickle, Tom Jones, a volume of Bentley’s Miscellany containing the serial of Jack Sheppard by Harrison Ainsworth, and What Every Woman of Forty-five ought to Know. The last work upset him very much because he found it unintelligible in parts, and where it was intelligible extremely alarming. An instinct of shamefulness made him conceal this book in a drawer, but he became very anxious to find out exactly how old his mother was. She, however, was more elusive on this point than he had ever known her, and each elaborate trap failed, even the innocent production of the table for ascertaining anybody’s age in a blue sixpenny Encyclopædia: still, the Encyclopædia was not without its entertainment, and the table of diseases at the end was very instructive. Among the books which Michael had mined down in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rewins’ kitchen was The Ingoldsby Legends illustrated by Cruikshank. These he found very enthralling, for though he was already acquainted with The Jackdaw of Rheims, he now discovered many other poems still more amusing, in many of which he came across with pleasure quotations that he remembered to have heard used with much effect by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech in the Shell. The macabre and ghostly lays did not affect him so much as the legends of the saints. These he read earnestly as he read Don Quixote, discerning less of laughter than of Gothic adventure in their fantastic pages, while his brain was fired by the heraldic pomps and ecclesiastical glories.</p>
				<p>About this time he happened to pay a visit to Christchurch Priory and by the vaulted airs of that sanctuary he was greatly thrilled. The gargoyles and brasses and effigies of dead knights called to him mysteriously, but the inappropriate juxtaposition of an early Victorian tomb shocked him with a sense of sacrilege. He could not bear to contemplate the nautical trousers of the boy commemorated. Yet, simultaneously with his outraged decorum, he was attracted to this tomb, as if he detected in that ingenuous boy posited among sad cherubs some kinship with himself.</p>
				<p>In bed that night Michael read The Ingoldsby Legends in a fever of enjoyment, while the shadows waved about the ceiling and walls of the seaside room in the vexed candlelight. As yet the details of the poems did not gain their full effect, because many of the words and references were not understood. He felt that knowledge was necessary before he could properly enjoy the colour of these tales. Michael had always been inclined to crystallize in one strong figure of imagination his vague impressions. Two years ago he had identified <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech with old prints, with Tom Brown’s Schooldays and with shelves of calf-bound books. Now in retrospect he, without being able to explain his reason to himself, identified <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech with that statue of the trousered boy in Christchurch Priory, and not merely <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech but even The Ingoldsby Legends as well. He felt that they were both all wrong in the sanctified glooms of the Middle Ages, and yet he rejoiced to behold them there, as if somehow they were a pledge of historic continuity. Without the existence of the trousered boy Michael would scarcely have believed in the reality of those stone ladies and carved knights. The candlelight fluttered and jigged in the seaside room, while <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Neech, The Ingoldsby Legends and the oratories of Christchurch became more and more hopelessly confused. Michael’s excited brain was formulating visions of immense cathedrals beneath whose arches pattered continually the populations of old prints: the tower of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s College, Oxford, rose, slim and lovely, against the storm-wrack of a Doré sky: Don Quixote tilted with knights-at-arms risen from the dead. Michael himself was swept along in cavalcades towards the clouds with Ivanhoe, Richard Cœur de Lion, Roderick Random and half a dozen woodcut murderers from the Newgate Calendar. Then, just as the candlelight was gasping and shimmering blue in the bowl of the candlestick, he fell asleep.</p>
				<p>In the sunshine of the next day Michael almost wondered whether like someone in The Ingoldsby Legends he had ridden with witches on a broomstick. All the cool security of boyhood had left him; he was in a turmoil of desire for an astounding experience. He almost asked himself what he wanted so dearly; and, as he pondered, out of the past in a vision came the picture of himself staring at the boy who walked beside the incense with a silver boat. What did the Lay of <abbr>St.</abbr> Alois say?</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
					<p>
						<span>This with his chasuble, this with his rosary,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>This with his incense-pot holding his nose awry.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Michael felt a craving to go somewhere and smell that powerful odour again. He remembered how the boy had put out his tongue and he envied him such familiarity with pomps and glories.</p>
				<p>“Are there any High Churches in Bournemouth?” he asked <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rewins. “Very high. Incense and all that, you know.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rewins informed him there was one church so high that some said it was practically ‘Roming Catholic.’</p>
				<p>“Where is it?” asked Michael, choking with excitement. Yet he had never before wanted to go to church. In the days of Nurse he had hated it. In the days of Miss Carthew he had only found it endurable if his friends were present. He had loathed the rustle of many women dressed in their best clothes. He had hated the throaty voices of smooth-faced clergymen. He had despised the sleek choir-boys smelling of yellow soap. Religion had been compounded of Collects, Greek Testament, Offertory Bags, varnish, qualms for the safety of one’s top-hat, the pleasure of an extra large hassock, ambition to be grown up and bend over instead of kneeling down, the podgy feel of a Prayer Book, and a profound disapproval that only Eton and Winchester among public schools were mentioned in its diaphanous fumbling pages. Now religion should be an adventure. The feeling that he was embarking upon the unknown made Michael particularly reticent, and he was afraid to tell his mother that on Sunday morning he proposed to attend the service at <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew’s, lest she might suggest coming also. He did not want to be irritated by Stella’s affectations and conceit, nor did he wish to notice various women turning round to study his mother’s hat. In the end Michael did not go on Sunday to the church of his intention, because at the last moment he could not brace himself to mumble an excuse.</p>
				<p>Late on the afternoon of the following day Michael walked through the gustiness of a swift-closing summer toward <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew’s, where it stood facing a stretch of sandy heather and twisted pine trees on the outskirts of Bournemouth. The sky was stained infrequently with the red of a lifeless sunset and, as Michael watched the desolation of summer’s retreat, he listened sadly to the sibilant heather lisping against the flutes of the pines, while from time to time the wind drummed against the buttresses and boomed against the bulk of the church. Michael drew near the west door whose hinges and nails stood out unnaturally distinct in the last light of the sun. Abruptly on the blowy eve the church-bell began to ring, and from various roads Michael saw people approaching, their heads bent against the gale. At length he made up his mind to follow one of the groups through the churchyard and presently, while the gate rattled behind him in the wind, he reached the warm glooms within. As he took his seat and perceived the altar loaded with flowers, dazzling with lighted candles, he wondered why this should be so on a Monday night in August. The air was pungent with the smell of wax and the stale perfume of incense on stone. The congregation was scattered about in small groups and units, and the vaulted silence was continually broken by coughs and sighs and hollow footsteps. From the tower the bell rang in slow monotone, while the wind whistled and moaned and flapped and boomed as if, thought Michael, all the devils in hell were trying to break into the holy building. The windows were now scarcely luminous with the wan shadow of daylight and would indeed have been opaque as coal had the inside of the church been better lighted. But the few wavering gas-jets in the nave made all seem dark save where the chancel, empty and candle-lit, shone and sparkled in a radiancy. Something in Michael’s attitude must have made a young man sitting behind lean over and ask if he wanted a Prayer Book. Michael turned quickly to see a lean and eager face.</p>
				<p>“Yes, please. I left mine at home,” he answered.</p>
				<p>“Well, come and sit by me,” said the young man.</p>
				<p>Michael changed his place and the young man talked in a low whisper, while the bell rang its monotone upon the gusts which swept howling round the church.</p>
				<p>“Solemn Evensong isn’t until seven o’clock. It’s our patronal festival, <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew’s Day⁠—you know. We had a good Mass this morning. Every year we get more people. Do you live in Bournemouth?”</p>
				<p>“No,” whispered Michael. “I’m just here for the holidays.”</p>
				<p>“What a pity,” said the stranger. “We do so want servers⁠—you know⁠—decent-looking servers. Our boys are so clumsy. It’s not altogether their fault⁠—the cassocks⁠—you know⁠—they’re only in two sizes. They trip up. I’m the Ceremonarius, and I can tell you I have my work cut out. Of course I ought to have been helping to-night. But I wasn’t sure I could get away from the Bank in time. I hope Wilson⁠—that’s our second thurifer⁠—won’t go wrong in the Magnificat. He usually does.”</p>
				<p>The bell stopped: there was a momentary hush for the battling wind to moan louder than ever: then the organ began to play and from the sacristy came the sound of a chanted Amen. Choristers appeared followed by two or three of the clergy, and when these had taken their places a second procession appeared, with boys in scarlet and lace and a tinkling censer and a priest in a robe of blood-red velvet patterned with dull gold.</p>
				<p>“That’s the new cope,” whispered the stranger. “Fine work, isn’t it?”</p>
				<p>“Awfully decent,” Michael whispered back.</p>
				<p>“All I hope is the acolytes will remember to put out the candles immediately after the Third Collect. It’s so important,” said the stranger.</p>
				<p>“I expect they will,” whispered Michael encouragingly.</p>
				<p>Then the Office began, and Michael, waiting for a spiritual experience, communed that night with the saints of God, as during the Magnificat his soul rose to divine glories on the fumes of the aspiring incense. There was a quality in the voices of the boys which expressed for him more beautifully than the full Sunday choir could have done, the pathos of human praise and the purity of his own surrender to Almighty God. The splendours of the Magnificat died away to a silence and one of the clergy stepped from his place to read the Second Lesson. As he came down the chancel steps Michael’s new friend whispered:</p>
				<p>“The censing of the altar was all right. It’s really a good thing sometimes to be a spectator⁠—you know⁠—one sees more.”</p>
				<p>Michael nodded a vague assent. Already the voice of the lector was vibrating through the church.</p>
				<div class="blockquottt">
					<p>
						<i>In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn towards the first day of the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre.</i>
					</p>
				</div>
				<p>Michael thought to himself how he had come to <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew’s when Sunday was over. That was strange.</p>
				<div class="blockquottt">
					<p>
						<i>His countenance was like lightning and his raiment white as snow: and for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men.</i>
					</p>
				</div>
				<p>“I wish that boy Wiggins wouldn’t fidget with his zuchetto,” Michael’s friend observed.</p>
				<div class="blockquottt">
					<p>
						<i>And behold, he goeth before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I have told you.</i>
					</p>
				</div>
				<p>Michael felt an impulse to sob, as he mentally offered the best of himself to the worship of Christ, for the words of the lesson were striking on his soul like bells.</p>
				<div class="blockquottt">
					<p>
						<i>And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but some doubted.</i>
					</p>
				</div>
				<p>“Now you see the other boy has started fidgeting with <em>his</em>,” complained the young man.</p>
				<div class="blockquottt">
					<p>
						<i>And, lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.</i>
						<i>Amen.</i>
					</p>
				</div>
				<p>As the lector’s retreating footsteps died away into the choir the words were burned on Michael’s heart, and for the first time he sang the Nunc Dimittis with a sense of the privilege of personally addressing Almighty God. When the Creed was chanted Michael uttered his belief passionately, and while the Third Collect was being read between the exalted candles of the acolytes he wondered why never before had the words struck him with all their power against the fears and fevers of the night.</p>
				<div class="blockquottt">
					<p>
						<i>Lighten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord; and by thy great mercy defend us from all perils and dangers of this night, for the love of thy only Son, our Saviour, Jesus Christ.</i>
						<i>Amen.</i>
					</p>
				</div>
				<p>The acolytes lowered their candles to extinguish them: then they darkened the altar while the hymn was being sung, and Michael’s friend gave a sigh of relief.</p>
				<p>“Perfectly all right,” he whispered.</p>
				<p>Michael himself was sorry to see the gradual extinction of the altar-lights; he had concentrated upon that radiance his new desire of adoration and a momentary chill fell upon him, as if the fiends without were gaining strength and fury. All dread and doubt was allayed when, after the murmured Grace of Our Lord, the congregation and the choir and the officiant knelt in a silent prayer. The wind still shrieked and thundered: the gas-jets waved uneasily above the huddled forms of the worshippers: but over all that incense-clouded gloom lay a spirit of tranquillity. Michael said the Our Father to himself and allowed his whole being to expand in a warmth of surrender. The purification of sincere prayer, voiced more by his attitude of mind than by any spoken word, made him infinitely at peace with life.</p>
				<p>When the choir and clergy had filed out and the sacristan like an old rook came limping down the aisle to usher the congregation forth into the dark wind of Bartlemy-tide, Michael’s friend said:</p>
				<p>“Wait just a minute. I want to speak to Father Moneypenny for a moment, and then we can walk back together.”</p>
				<p>Michael nodded, and presently his friend came back from the sacristy with Father Moneypenny in cassock and biretta, looking like the photographs of clergymen that Michael remembered in Nurse’s album long ago.</p>
				<p>“So you enjoyed the Evensong?” enquired the priest. “Capital! You must come to Mass next Sunday. There will be a procession. By the way, Prout, perhaps your young friend would help us. We shall want extra torch-boys.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout agreed, and Michael, although he wondered what his mother would say, was greatly excited by the idea. They were standing now by the door of the church and as it opened a gust of wind burst in and whistled round the interior. Father Moneypenny shivered.</p>
				<p>“What a night. The end of summer, I’m afraid.”</p>
				<p>He closed the door, and Michael and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout forced their way through the gale over the wet gravel of the churchyard. The pine trees and the heather made a melancholy concert, and they were glad to reach the blown lamplight of the streets.</p>
				<p>“Will you come round to my place?” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout asked.</p>
				<p>“Well, I ought to go back. My mater will be anxious,” said Michael.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout thereupon invited him to come round to-morrow afternoon.</p>
				<p>“I shall be back from the Bank about five. Good night. You’ve got my card? Bernard Prout, Esdraelon, Saxton Road. Good night. Pleased to have met you.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane was surprized to hear of Michael’s visit to <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew’s.</p>
				<p>“You’re getting so secretive, dearest boy. I’d no idea you were becoming interested in religion.”</p>
				<p>“Well, it is interesting,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>“Of course. I know it must be. So many people think of nothing else. And do you really want to march in the procession?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, but don’t you and Stella come,” Michael said.</p>
				<p>“Oh, I must, Michael. I’d love to see you in all those pretty clothes.”</p>
				<p>“Well, I <em>can</em> go round and see this chap Prout, can’t I?” Michael asked.</p>
				<p>“I suppose so,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane replied. “Of course, I don’t know anything about him. Is he a gentleman?”</p>
				<p>“Of course he’s a gentleman,” affirmed Michael warmly. “Besides I don’t see it matters a bit whether he’s a gentleman or not.”</p>
				<p>“No, of course it doesn’t really, as it all has to do with religion,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane agreed. “Nothing is so mixed as religious society.”</p>
				<p>Saxton Road possessed no characteristic to distinguish it from many similar roads in Bournemouth. A few hydrangeas debated in sheltered corners whether they should be pink or blue, and the number of each house was subordinate to its title. The gate of Esdraelon clicked behind Michael’s entrance just as the gate of Homeview or Ardagh or Glenside would have clicked. By the bay-window of the ground floor was planted a young passion-flower whose nursery label lisped against the brick-work, and whose tendrils were flattened beneath wads of nail-pierced flannel. Michael was directed upstairs to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout’s sitting-room on the first floor, where the owner was arranging the tea-cups.</p>
				<p>“I’m so glad you were able to come,” he said.</p>
				<p>Michael looked round the room with interest, and while the tea-cake slowly cooled <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout discussed with enthusiasm his possessions.</p>
				<p>“That’s <abbr>St.</abbr> Bernardine of Sienna,” he explained, pointing to a coloured statuette. “My patron, you know. Curious I should have been born on his day and be christened Bernard. I thought of changing my name to Bernardine, but it’s so difficult at a Bank. Of course, I have a cult for <abbr>St.</abbr> Bernard too, but I never really can forgive him for opposing the Immaculate Conception. Father Moneypenny and I have great arguments on that point. I’m afraid he’s a <em>little</em> bit wobbly. But absolutely sound on the Assumption. Oh, absolutely, I’m glad to say. In fact, I don’t mind telling you that next year we intend to keep it as a Double of the First Class with Octave <em>which</em>, of course, it <em>is</em>. This rosary is made of olive-wood from the Garden of Gethsemane and I’m very anxious to get it blessed by the Pope. Some friends of mine are going to Rome next Easter with a Polytechnic tour, so I <em>may</em> be able to manage it. But it’s difficult. The Cardinals⁠—you know,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout vaguely. “They’re inclined to be bitter against English Catholics. Of course, Vaughan made the mistake of his life in getting the Pope to pronounce against English Orders. I know a Roman priest told me he considered it a fatal move. However⁠—you’re waiting for your tea?”</p>
				<p>Michael ate <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout’s bread-and-butter and drank his tea, while the host hopped from trinket to trinket.</p>
				<p>“This is a sacred amulet which belonged to one of the Macdonalds who fought at Prestonpans. I suppose you’re a Jacobite? Of course, I belong to all the Legitimist Societies⁠—the White Rose, the White Cockade, the White Carnation. Everyone. I wish I were a Scotchman, although my grandmother was a Miss Macmillan, so I’ve got Scotch blood. You <em>are</em> a Jacobite, aren’t you?”</p>
				<p>“Rather,” said Michael as enthusiastically as his full mouth would allow him to declare.</p>
				<p>“Of course, it’s the only logical political attitude for an English Catholic to adopt,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout. “All this Erastianism⁠—you know. Terrible. What’s the Privy Council got to do with Vestments? Still the Episcopal appointments haven’t been so bad lately. That’s Lord Salisbury. Of course, we’ve had trouble with our Bishop. Oh, yes. He simply declines to listen to reason on the subject of Reservation for the Sick. Personally I advised Father Moneypenny not to pay any attention to him. I said the Guild of <abbr>St.</abbr> Wilfrid⁠—that’s our servers’ guild, you know⁠—was absolutely in favour of defiance, open defiance. But one of the churchwardens got round him. There’s your Established Church. Money’s what churchwardens think of⁠—simply money. And has religion got anything to do with money? Nothing. ‘Blessed are the poor.’ You can’t go against that, as I told Major Wilton⁠—that’s our people’s warden⁠—in the sacristy. He’s a client of ours at the Bank, or I should have said a jolly sight more. I should have told him that in my opinion his attitude was simony⁠—rank simony, and let it go at that. But I couldn’t very well, and, of course, it doesn’t look well for the Ceremonarius and the churchwarden to be bickering after Mass. By the way, will you help us next Sunday?”</p>
				<p>“I’d like to,” said Michael, “but I don’t know anything about it.”</p>
				<p>“There’ll be a rehearsal,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout. “And it’s perfectly simple. You elevate your torch first of all at the Sanctus and then at the Consecration. And now, if you’ve finished your tea, I’ll show you my oratory. Of course, you’ll understand that I’m only in rooms here, but the landlady is a very pleasant woman. She let me plant that passion-flower in the garden. Perhaps you noticed it? The same with this oratory. It <em>was</em> a housemaid’s cupboard, but it was very inconvenient⁠—and there isn’t a housemaid as a matter of fact⁠—so I secured it. Come along.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout led the way on to the landing, at the end of which were two doors.</p>
				<p>“We can’t both kneel down, unless the door’s open,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout. “But when I’m alone, I can <em>just</em> shut myself in.”</p>
				<p>He opened the oratory door as he spoke, and Michael was impressed by the appearance of it. The small window had been covered with a rice-paper design of Jesse’s Rod.</p>
				<p>“It’s a bit ‘Protty,’ ” whispered <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout. “But I thought it was better than plain squares of blue and red.”</p>
				<p>“Much better,” Michael agreed.</p>
				<p>A ledge nailed beneath the window supported two brass candlesticks and a crucifix. The reredos was an Arundel print of the Last Supper and on corner brackets on either side were statues of the Immaculate Conception and Our Lady of Victories. A miniature thurible hung on a nail and on another nail was a holy-water stoup which Michael at first thought was intended for soap. In front of the altar was a prie-dieu stacked with books of devotion. There were also blessed palms, very dusty, and a small sanctuary lamp suspended from the ceiling. Referring to this, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout explained that really it came from the Turkish Exhibition at Earl’s Court, but that he thought it would do as he had carefully exorcized it according to the use of Sarum.</p>
				<p>“Shall we say Vespers?” suggested <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout. “You know⁠—the Small Office of the Blessed Virgin. It won’t take long. We can say Compline <em>too</em>, if you like.”</p>
				<p>“Just as you like,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>“You’re sure you don’t mind the door being left open? Because, you see, we can’t both get in otherwise. In fact, I have to kneel sideways when I’m alone.”</p>
				<p>“Won’t your landlady think it rather rum?” Michael asked.</p>
				<p>“Good gracious, no. Why, when we have Vespers of <abbr>St.</abbr> Charles the Martyr, I have fellows kneeling all the way down the stairs, you know⁠—members of the White Rose League. Bournemouth and South of England Branch.”</p>
				<p>Michael was handed a thin sky-blue book labelled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Office of the <abbr class="initialism eoc">BVM</abbr></i></p>
				<p>“Latin or English?” queried <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout.</p>
				<p>“Whichever you like,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>“Well, Latin, if you don’t mind. I’m anxious to learn Latin, and I find this is good practice.”</p>
				<p>“It doesn’t look very good Latin,” said Michael doubtfully.</p>
				<p>“Doesn’t it?” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout. “It ought to. It’s the right version.”</p>
				<p>“I expect this is Hellenistic⁠—I mean Romanistic⁠—Latin,” said Michael, who was proud of his momentary superiority in knowledge. “Greek Test is Hellenistic Greek.”</p>
				<p>“Do you know Greek?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout.</p>
				<p>“A little.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout sighed.</p>
				<p>When the Office was concluded, Michael promised he would attend a rehearsal of next Sunday’s ceremony and, if he felt at ease, the Solemn High Mass itself. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout, before Michael went away, lent him a book called Ritual Reason Why, and advised him to buy The Catholic Religion at One Shilling, and meanwhile to practise direct Invocation of the Saints.</p>
				<p>At home Michael applied himself with ardour to the mastery of his religion. He wrestled with the liturgical colours; he tried to grasp the difference between Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation and the Real Presence; and he congratulated himself upon being under the immediate patronage of an Archangel. Also with Charles as his first name he felt he could fairly claim the protection of <abbr>St.</abbr> Charles the Martyr, though later on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout suggested <abbr>St.</abbr> Charles Borromeo as a less ordinary patron. However, there was more than ritualism in Michael’s new attitude, more than the passion to collect new rites and liturgies and ornaments as once he had collected the portraits of famous cricketers or silkworms or silver-paper. To be sure, it soon came to seem to him a terribly important matter whether according to the Roman sequence red were worn at Whitsuntide or whether according to Old English use white were the liturgical colour. Soon he would experience a shock of dismay on hearing that some reputed Catholic had taken the Ablutions at the wrong moment, just as once he had been irritated by ignorant people confusing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W. W.</abbr> Read of Surrey with Read (<abbr class="name">M.</abbr>) of the same county. Beyond all this Michael sincerely tried to correct his morals and manners in the light of aspiration and faith. He experienced a revolt against impurity of any kind and was simultaneously seized with a determination to suffer Stella’s conceit gladly. He really felt a deep-seated avarice for being good. He may not have distinguished between morality due to emotion and morality wrung out of intellectual assent: but he did know that the Magnificat’s incense took him to a higher elation than Dora’s curly head upon his shoulder, or even than Alan’s bewitching company. Under the influence of faith, Michael found himself bursting with an affection for his mother such as he had not felt for a long time. Indeed Michael was in a state of love. He loved the candles on the altar, he loved his mother’s beauty, he loved Stella, he loved the people on the beach and the August mornings and the zest for acquiring and devouring information upon every detail connected with the Catholic religion; and out of his love he gratified <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout by consenting to bear a torch at the Solemn High Mass on the Sunday within the octave of <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew, Apostle and Martyr and Patron of <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew’s Church, Bournemouth.</p>
				<p>Michael’s first High Mass was an emotional experience deeper even than that windy Evensong. The church was full of people. The altar was brilliant with flowers and lights. The sacristy was crowded with boys in scarlet cassocks and slippers and zuchettos, quarrelling about their cottas and arguing about their heights. Everybody had a favourite banner which he wanted to escort and, to complicate matters still further, everybody had a favourite companion by whose side he wished to walk.</p>
				<p>The procession was marshalled before the altar: the organ boomed through the church: the first thurifer started off, swinging his censer towards the clouded roof. After him went the cross of ebony and silver, while one by one at regular intervals between detachments of the choir the banners of the saints floated into action. Michael escorted the blue velvet banner of Our Lady, triumphant, crowned, a crescent moon beneath her feet and round about her stars and Cherubim. The procession was long enough to fill two aisles at once, and as Michael turned up the south aisle on the return to the chancel, he saw the pomp of the procession’s rear⁠—the second thurifer, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout in a cotta bordered by lace two feet deep, the golden crucifix aloft, the acolytes with their golden candlesticks, the blood-red dalmatic and tunicle of the deacon and sub-deacon, and solemnly last of all the blood-red cope of the celebrant. Michael took no pleasure in being observed by the congregation; he was simply elated by the privilege of being able to express his desire to serve God, and during the Mass, when the Sanctus bell chimed forth, he raised his torch naturally to the pæan of the salutation. The service was long: the music was elaborate: it was back-breaking work to kneel on the chancel steps without support; but Michael welcomed the pain with pleasure. During the Elevation of the Host, as he bowed his head before the wonder of bread and wine made God, his brain reeled in an ecstasy of sublime worship. There was a silence save for the censer tinkling steadily and the low whispered words of the priest and the click of the broken wafer. The candles burned with a supernatural intensity: the boys who lately quarrelled over precedence were hushed as angels: the stillness became fearful; the cold steps burned into Michael’s knees and the incense choked him. At last after an age of adoration, the plangent appeal of the Agnus Dei came with a melody that seemed the music of the sobbing world from which all tears had departed in a clarity of harmonious sound.</p>
				<p>Before Michael left Bournemouth, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout promised to come and see him in London, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moneypenny said he would write to a priest who would be glad to prepare him for Confirmation. When Michael reached school again, he felt shy at meeting Alan who would talk about nothing but football and was dismayed to find Michael indifferent to the delights of playing three-quarter on Middle Side. Michael deplored Alan’s failure to advance intellectually beyond mere football and the two of them temporarily lost touch with each other’s ambitions. Michael now read nothing but ecclesiastical books and was greatly insulted by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner’s elementary questions. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner was the priest to whom <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moneypenny had written about Michael. He had invited him to tea and together they had settled that Michael should be confirmed early in the spring. Michael borrowed half a dozen books from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner and returned home to make an attempt to convert the cook and the housemaid to the Catholic faith as a preliminary to converting his mother and Alan. In the end he did actually convert a boy in the Lower Fifth who for his strange beliefs suffered severely at the hands of his father, a Plymouth Brother. Michael wished that Stella had not gone back to Germany, for he felt that in her he would have had a splendid object on whom to practise his power of controversy. At <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner’s house Michael met another Jacobean called Chator in whom he found a fellow-enthusiast. Chator knew of two other Jacobeans interested in Church matters, Martindale and Rigg, and the four of them founded a society called De Rebus Ecclesiasticis which met every Friday evening in Michael’s room to discuss the Catholic Church in all her aspects. The discussions were often heated because Michael had violently Ultra-montane leanings, Chator was narrowly Sarum, Martindale tried to preserve a happy mean and Rigg always agreed with the last speaker. The Society De Rebus Ecclesiasticis was splendidly quixotic and gloriously unrelated to the dead present. To the quartette of members Archbishop Laud was a far more more vital proposition than Archbishop Temple, the society of cavaliers was more vividly realized than the Fabian Society. As was to be expected from Michael’s preoccupation with the past, he became very anxious again about his parentage. He longed to hear that in some way he was connected with Jacobite heroes and the romantic Stuarts. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane was no longer able to put him off with contradictions and vagueness: Michael demanded his family tree. The hymn ‘Faith of our Fathers’ ringing through a Notting Dale mission-hall moved him to demand his birthright of family history.</p>
				<p>“Well, I’ll tell you, Michael,” said his mother at last. “Your father ought to have been the Earl of Saxby⁠—only⁠—something went wrong⁠—some certificate or something.”</p>
				<p>“An Earl?” cried Michael, staggered by the splendid news. “But⁠—but, mother, we met Lord Saxby. Who was that?”</p>
				<p>“He’s a relation. Only, please don’t tell people about this, because they wouldn’t understand. It’s all very muddled and difficult.”</p>
				<p>“My father ought to have been Lord Saxby? Why wasn’t he? Mother, was he illegitimate?”</p>
				<p>“Michael, how can you talk like that? Of course not.”</p>
				<p>Michael blushed because his mother blushed.</p>
				<p>“I’m sorry, mother, I thought he might have been. People are. You read about them often enough.”</p>
				<p>Michael decided that as he must not tell Chator, Martindale and Rigg the truth, he would, at any rate, join himself on to the House of Saxby collaterally. To his disappointment, he discovered that the only reference in history to an Earl of Saxby made out that particular one to be a most pestilent Roundhead. So Michael gave up being the Legitimist Earl of Saxby, and settled instead to be descended through the indiscretion of an early king from the Stuarts. Michael grew more and more ecclesiastical as time went on. He joined several Jacobite societies, and accompanied <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout on the latter’s London visit to a reception at Clifford’s Inn Hall in honour of the Legitimist Emperor of Byzantium. Michael was very much impressed by kissing the hand of an Emperor, and even more deeply impressed by the Scottish piper who marched up and down during the light refreshment at one shilling a head afterwards. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prout, accompanied by Michael, Chator, Martindale and Rigg, spent the Sunday of his stay in town by attending early Mass in Kensington, High Mass in Holborn, Benediction in Shoreditch and Evensong in Paddington. He also joined several more guilds, confraternities and societies and presented Michael with one hair from the five hairs he possessed of a lock of Prince Charlie’s hair (authentic) before he returned to Bournemouth. This single hair was a great responsibility to Michael, until he placed it in a silver locket to wear round his neck. During that year occurred what the papers called a Crisis in the Church, and Michael and his three friends took in every week The Church Times, The Church Review, The English Churchman, Church Bells, The Record and The Rock in order to play their part in the crisis. They attended Protestant meetings to boo and hiss from the gallery or to applaud violently gentlemen on their side who rose to ask the lecturer what they supposed to be irrefutable questions. In the spring Michael made his first Confession and was confirmed. The first Confession had more effect on his imagination than the Confirmation, which in retrospect seemed chiefly a sensation of disappointment that the Bishop in view of the crisis in the Church refused to wear the mitre temptingly laid out for him by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner. The Confession, however, was a true test of Michael’s depth. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner was by no means a priest who only thought of candles and lace. He was a gaunt and humorous man, ready to drag out from his penitents their very souls.</p>
				<p>Michael found that first Confession an immense strain upon his truthfulness and pluck, and he made up his mind never to commit another mortal sin, so deeply did he blush in the agony of revelation. Venial faults viewed in the aggregate became appalling, and the real sins, as one by one Michael compelled himself to admit them, stabbed his self-consciousness with daggers of shame. Michael had a sense of completeness which prevented him from making a bad Confession, from gliding over his sins and telling half-truths, and having embarked upon the duties of his religion he was not going to avoid them. The Confession seemed to last for ever. Beforehand, Michael had supposed there would be only one commandment whose detailed sins would make his heart beat with the difficulty of confessing them; but when he knelt in the empty church before the severe priest, every breach of the other commandments assumed a demoniac importance. Michael thought that never before could Father Viner have listened to such a narration of human depravity from a boy of fifteen, or even from a man full grown. He half expected to see the priest rise in the middle and leave his chair in disgust. Michael felt beads of sweat trickling from his forehead: the strain grew more terrible: the crucifix before him gave him no help: the book he held fell from his fingers. Then he heard the words of absolution, tranquil as evening bells. The inessentials of his passionate religion faded away in the strength and beauty of God’s acceptation of his penitence. Outside in the April sunlight Michael could have danced his exultation, before he ran home winged with the ecstasy of a light heart.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
