<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I: The First Day</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
				<h4 epub:type="title">The First Day</h4>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Michael felt glad to think he would start the adventure of Oxford from Paddington. The simplicity of that railway station might faintly mitigate alarms which no amount of previous deliberation could entirely disperse. He remembered how once he had lightly seen off a Cambridge friend from Liverpool Street and, looking back at the suburban tumult of the Great Eastern Railway, he was grateful for the simplicity of Paddington.</p>
			<p>Michael had been careful that all his heavy luggage should be sent in advance; and he had shown himself gravely exacting toward Alan in this matter of luggage, writing several times to remind him of his promise not to appear on the platform with more than a portmanteau of moderate size and a normal kit-bag. Michael hoped this precaution would prevent at any rate the porters from commenting upon the freshness of him and his friend.</p>
			<p>“Oxford train?” inquired a porter, as the hansom pulled up. Michael nodded, and made up his mind to show his esteem when he tipped this promethean.</p>
			<p>“Third class?” the porter went on. Michael mentally doubled the tip, for he had neglected to assure himself beforehand about the etiquette of class, and nothing could have suited so well his self-consciousness as this information casually yielded.</p>
			<p>“Let me see, you didn’t have any golf-clubs, did you, sir?” asked the porter.</p>
			<p>Michael shook his head regretfully, for as he looked hurriedly up and down the platform in search of Alan, he perceived golf-clubs everywhere, and when at last he saw him, actually even he had a golf-bag slung over his shoulder.</p>
			<p>“I never knew you played golf,” said Michael indignantly.</p>
			<p>“I don’t. These are the governor’s. He’s given up playing,” Alan explained.</p>
			<p>“Are you going to play?” Michael pursued. He was feeling rather envious of the appearance of these veteran implements.</p>
			<p>“I may have a shot,” Alan admitted.</p>
			<p>“You might have told me you were going to bring them,” Michael grumbled.</p>
			<p>“My dear old ass, I never knew I was, until the governor wanged them into my lap just as I was starting.”</p>
			<p>Michael turned aside and bought a number of papers, far too many for the short journey. Indeed, all the way they lay on the rack unregarded, while the train crossed and recrossed the silver Thames. At first he was often conscious of the other undergraduates in the compartment, who seemed to be eying him with a puzzled contempt; but very soon, when he perceived that this manner of looking at one’s neighbor was general, he became reconciled to the attitude and ascribed it to a habit of mind rather than to the expression of any individual distaste. Then suddenly, as Michael was gazing out of the window, the pearly sky broke into spires and pinnacles and domes and towers. He caught his breath for one bewitched moment, before he busied himself with the luggage on the rack.</p>
			<p>On the platform Michael and Alan decided to part company, as neither of them felt sure enough whether <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s or Christ Church were nearer to the station to risk a joint hansom.</p>
			<p>“Shall I come and see you this afternoon?” Michael rashly offered.</p>
			<p>“Oh, rather,” Alan agreed, and they turned away from one another to secure their cabs.</p>
			<p>All the time that Michael was driving to <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s, he was regretting he had not urged Alan to visit him first. A growing sensation of shy dread was making him vow that once safe in his own rooms at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s nothing should drag him forth again that day. What on earth would he say when he arrived at the college? Would he have to announce himself? How would he find his rooms? On these points he had pestered several Old Jacobeans now at Oxford, but none of them could remember the precise ceremonies of arrival. Michael leaned back in the hansom and cursed their inefficient memories.</p>
			<p>Then the cab pulled up by the <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s lodge, and events proceeded with unexpected rapidity. A cheerful man with red hair and a round face welcomed his luggage. The cabman was paid the double of his correct fare, and to Michael’s relief drove off instantly. From a sort of glass case that filled half the interior of the lodge somebody very much like a family butler inquired richly who Michael was.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. M. S.</abbr> Fane?” rolled out the unctuous man.</p>
			<p>Michael nodded.</p>
			<p>“Is there another Fane?” he asked curiously.</p>
			<p>“No, sir,” said the head porter, and the negative came out with the sound of a drawn cork. “No, sir, but I wished to hessateen if I had your initials down correct in my list. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. M. S.</abbr> Fane,” he went on, looking at a piece of paper. “<abbr>St.</abbr> Cuthbert’s. Four. Two pair right. Your servant is Porcher. Your luggage has arrived, and perhaps you’ll settle with me presently. Henry will show you to your rooms. Henry! <abbr>St.</abbr> Cuthbert’s. Four. Two pair right.”</p>
			<p>The redheaded under-porter picked up Michael’s bag, and Michael was preparing to follow him at once, when the unctuous man held up a warning hand. Then he turned to look into a large square pigeonhole labeled Porcher.</p>
			<p>“These letters are for you, sir,” he explained pompously. Michael took them, and in a dream followed Henry under a great gothic gateway, and along a gravel path. In a doorway numbered <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Henry stopped and shouted “Porcher!” From an echoing vault came a cry in answer, and the scout appeared.</p>
			<p>“One of your gentlemen arrived,” said Henry. “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fane.” Then he touched his cap and retired.</p>
			<p>“Any more luggage in the lodge, sir?” Porcher asked.</p>
			<p>“Not much,” said Michael apologetically.</p>
			<p>“There’s a nice lot of stuff in your rooms,” Porcher informed him. “Come in yesterday morning, it did.”</p>
			<p>They were mounting the stone stairway, and on each of the floors Michael was made mechanically aware by a printed notice above a water-tap that no slops must be emptied there. This prohibition stuck in his mind somehow as the first ascetic demand of the university.</p>
			<p>“These are your rooms, sir, and when you want me, you’ll shout, of course. I’m just unpacking <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lonsdale’s wine.”</p>
			<p>Michael was conscious of pale October sunlight upon the heaped-up packing-cases; he was conscious of the unnatural brilliancy of the fire in the sunlight; he was conscious that life at Oxford was conducted with much finer amenities than life at school. Simultaneously he was aware of a loneliness; yet as he once more turned to survey his room, it was a fleeting loneliness which quickly perished in the satisfaction of a privacy that hitherto he had never possessed. He turned into the bedroom, and looked out across the quad, across the rectangle of vivid green grass, across the Warden’s garden with its faint gaiety of autumnal flowers and tufted gray walls, and beyond to where the elms of the deer-park were massed against the thin sky and the deer moved in leisurely files about the spare sunlight.</p>
			<p>It did not take Michael long to arrange his clothes; and then the problem of undoing the packing-cases presented itself. A hammer would be necessary, and a chisel. He must shout for Porcher. Shouting in the tremulous peace of this October morning would inevitably attract more attention to himself than would be pleasant, and he postponed the summons in favor of an examination of his letters. One after another he opened them, and every one was the advertisement of a tailor or hairdresser or tobacconist. The tailors were the most insistent; they even went so far as to announce that representatives would call upon him at his pleasure. Michael made up his mind to order his cap and gown after lunch. Lunch! How should he obtain lunch? Where should he obtain lunch? When should he obtain lunch? Obviously there must be some precise manner of obtaining lunch, some ritual consecrated by generations of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s men. The loneliness came back triumphant, and plunged him dejectedly down into a surprisingly deep wicker-chair. The fire crackled in the silence, and the problem of lunch remained insoluble. The need for Porcher’s advice became more desperate. Other freshmen before him must have depended upon their scout’s experience. He began to practice calling Porcher in accents so low that they acquired a tender and reproachful significance. Michael braced himself for the performance after these choked and muffled rehearsals, and went boldly out on to the stone landing. An almost entranced silence held the staircase, a silence that he could not bring himself to violate. On the door of the rooms opposite he read his neighbor’s name⁠—<em>Mackintosh</em>. He wished he knew whether Mackintosh were a freshman. It would be delightful to make him share the responsibility of summoning Porcher from his task of arranging Lonsdale’s wine. And who was Lonsdale? <em>No slops must be emptied here! Mackintosh! Fane!</em> Here were three announcements hinting at humanity in a desolation of stillness. Michael reading his own name gathered confidence and a volume of breath, leaned over the stone parapet of the landing and, losing all his courage in a sigh, decided to walk downstairs and take his chance of meeting Porcher on the way.</p>
			<p>On the floor beneath Michael read <em>Bannerman</em> over the left-hand door and <em>Templeton-Collins</em> over the right-hand door. While he was pondering the personality and status of Templeton-Collins, presumably the gentleman himself appeared, stared at Michael very deliberately, came forward and, leaning over the parapet, yelled in a voice that combined rage, protest, disappointment and appeal with the maximum of sound: “Porcher!” After which, Templeton-Collins again stared very deliberately at Michael and retired into his room, while Michael hurried down to intercept the scout, hoping his dismay at Templeton-Collins’ impatience would not be too great to allow him to pay a moment’s attention to himself.</p>
			<p>However, on the ground floor the silence was still unbroken, and hopelessly Michael read over the right-hand door <em>Amherst</em>, over the left-hand door <em>Lonsdale</em>. What critical moment had arrived in the unpacking of Lonsdale’s wine to make the scout so heedless of Templeton-Collins’ call? Again it resounded from above, and Michael looking up involuntarily, caught the downward glance of Templeton-Collins himself.</p>
			<p>“I say, is Porcher down there?” the latter asked fretfully.</p>
			<p>“I think he’s unpacking Lonsdale’s wine.”</p>
			<p>“Who’s Lonsdale?” demanded Templeton-Collins. “You might sing out and tell him I want him.”</p>
			<p>With this request Templeton-Collins vanished, leaving Michael in a quandary. There was only one hope of relieving the intolerable situation, he thought, which was to shout “Porcher” from where he was standing. This he did at the very moment the scout emerged from Lonsdale’s rooms.</p>
			<p>“Coming, sir,” said Porcher in an aggrieved voice.</p>
			<p>“I think <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Templeton-Collins is calling you,” Michael explained, rather lamely he felt, since it must have been obvious to the scout that Michael himself had been calling him.</p>
			<p>“And I say,” he added hurriedly, “you might bring me up a hammer or something to open my boxes, when you’ve done.”</p>
			<p>Leaving Porcher to appease the outraged Templeton-Collins, Michael retreated to the security of his own rooms, where in a few minutes the scout appeared to raise the question of lunch.</p>
			<p>“Will you take commons, sir?”</p>
			<p>Michael looked perplexed.</p>
			<p>“Commons is bread and cheese. Most of my gentlemen takes commons. If you want anything extra, you go to the kitchen and write your name down for what you want.”</p>
			<p>This sounded too difficult, and Michael gratefully chose commons.</p>
			<p>“Ale, sir?”</p>
			<p>Michael nodded. If the scout had suggested champagne, he would have assented immediately.</p>
			<p>Porcher set to work and undid the cases; he also explained where the china was kept and the wood and the coal. He expounded the theory of roll-calls and chapels, and was indeed so generous with information on every point of college existence that Michael would have been glad to retain his services for the afternoon.</p>
			<p>“And the other men on this staircase?” Michael asked, “are any of them freshers?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mackintosh, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Amherst, and the Honorable Lonsdale is all freshmen. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Templeton-Collins and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bannerman is second year. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Templeton-Collins had the rooms on the ground floor last term. Very noisy gentleman. Very fond of practicing with a coach-horn. And he don’t improve,” said Porcher meditatively.</p>
			<p>“Do you mean on the coach-horn?” Michael asked.</p>
			<p>“Don’t improve in the way of noise. Noise seems to regular delight him. He’d shout the head off of a deaf man. Did you bring any wine, sir?”</p>
			<p>Michael shook his head.</p>
			<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lonsdale brought too much. Too much. It’s easier to order it as you want it from the Junior Common Room. Anything else, sir?”</p>
			<p>Michael tried to think of something to detain for a while the voluble service of Porcher, but as he seemed anxious to be gone, he confessed there was nothing.</p>
			<p>Left alone again, Michael began to unpack his pictures. Somehow those black and red scenes of Montmartre and the landscapes of the Sussex downs with a slight atmosphere of Japan seemed to him unsatisfactory in this new room, and he hung them forthwith in his bedroom. For his sitting-room he resolved to buy certain pictures that for a long time he had coveted⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Mona Lisa</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Primavera</i> and Rembrandt’s <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Knight in Armor</i> and Montegna’s <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting"><abbr>St.</abbr> George</i>. Those other relics of faded and jejune aspirations would label him too definitely. People would see them hanging on his walls and consider him a decadent. Michael did not wish to be labeled in his first term. Oxford promised too much of intellectual romance and adventure for him to set out upon his Odyssey with the stepping-stones of dead tastes hung round his neck. Oxford should be approached with a stainless curiosity. Already he felt that she would only yield her secret in return for absolute surrender. This the grave city demanded.</p>
			<p>After his pictures Michael unpacked his books. The deep shelves set in the wall beside the fireplace looked alluring in their emptiness, but when he had set out in line all the books he possessed, they seemed a scanty and undistinguished crowd. The pirated American edition of Swinburne alone carried itself with an air: the Shelley and the Keats were really editions better suited to the glass and gloom of a seaside lodging: the schoolbooks looked like trippers usurping the gothic grandeur of these shelves. Moreover, the space was eked out with tattered paper editions that with too much room at their disposal collapsed with an appearance of ill-favored intoxication. Michael examined his possessions in critical discontent. They seemed to symbolize the unpleasant crudity of youth. In the familiar surroundings of childhood they had seemed on the contrary to testify to his maturity. Now at Oxford he felt most abominably young again, yet he was able to console himself with the thought that youth would be no handicap among his peers. He took down the scenes of Montmartre even from the walls of his bedroom and pushed them ignominiously out of sight under the bed.</p>
			<p>Michael abandoned the contemplation of his possessions, and looked out of his sitting-room window at the High. There was something salutary in the jangle of the trams, in the vision of ordinary people moving unconsciously about the academic magnificence of Oxford. An undergraduate with gown wrapped carelessly round his neck flashed past on a bicycle, and Michael was discouraged by the sense of his diabolic ease. The luxury of his own rooms, the conviction of his new independence, the excitement of an undiscovered life all departed from him, and he was left with nothing but a loneliness more bitter even than when at Randell House he had first encountered school.</p>
			<p>Porcher came in presently with lunch, and the commons of bread and cheese with the ale foaming in a silver tankard added the final touch to Michael’s depression. He thought that nothing in the world, could express the spirit of loneliness so perfectly as a sparse lunch laid for one on a large table. He wandered away from its melancholy invitation into the bedroom and looked sadly down into the quad. In every doorway stood knots of senior men talking: continually came new arrivals to hail familiarly their friends after the vacation: scouts hurried to and fro with trays of food: from window to window gossip, greetings, appointments were merrily shouted. Michael watched this scene of intimate movement played against the background of elms and gray walls. The golden fume of the October weather transcended somehow all impermanence, and he felt with a sudden springing of imagination that so had this scene been played before, that so forever would it be played for generations to come. Yet for him as yet outside the picture remained, fortunately less eternal, that solitary lunch. He ate it hurriedly and as soon as he had finished set out to find Alan at Christ Church.</p>
			<p>Freedom came back with the elation of walking up the High; and in the Christ Church lodge Michael was able to ask without a blush for Alan’s rooms. The great space of Tom quad by absorbing his self-consciousness allowed him to feel himself an unit of the small and decorative population that enhanced the architecture there. The scattered, groups of friends whose voices became part of the very air itself like the wings of the pigeons and the perpetual tapping of footsteps, the two dons treading in slow confabulation that wide flagged terrace, even himself were here forever. Michael captured again in that moment the crystallized vision of Oxford which had first been vouchsafed to him long ago by that old print of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s tower. He turned reluctantly away from Tom quad, and going on to seek Alan in Meadows, by mistake found himself in Peckwater. A tall fair undergraduate was standing alone in the center of the quad, cracking a whip. Suddenly Michael realized that his father had been at Christ Church; and this tall fair whip-cracker served for him as the symbol of his father. He must have often stood here so, cracking a whip; and Michael never came into Peckwater without recreating him so occupied on a fine autumn afternoon, whip in hand, very tall and very fair in the glinting sunlight.</p>
			<p>Dreams faded out, when Michael ran up the staircase to Alan’s rooms; but he was full-charged again with all that suppressed intellectual excitement which he had counted upon finding in Oxford, but which he had failed to find until the wide tranquillity of Tom quad had given him, as it were, the benediction of the University.</p>
			<p>“Hullo, Alan!” he cried. “How are you getting on? I say, why do they stick ‘<abbr>Mr.</abbr>’ in front of your name over the door? At <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s we drop the ‘<abbr>Mr.</abbr>’ or any other sort of title. Aren’t you unpacked <em>yet</em>? You are a slacker. Look here, I want you to come out with me at once. I’ve got to get some more picture-wire and a gown and a picture of <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Mona Lisa</i>.”</p>
			<p>“Mona how much?” said Alan.</p>
			<p>“<i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">La Gioconda</i>, you ass.”</p>
			<p>“Sorry, my mistake,” said Alan.</p>
			<p>“And I saw some rattling bookshops as I came up the High,” Michael went on. “What did you have for lunch? I had bread and cheese⁠—commons we call it at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s. I say, I think I’m glad I don’t have to wear a scholar’s gown.”</p>
			<p>“I’m an exhibitioner,” said Alan.</p>
			<p>“Well, it’s the same thing. I like a commoner’s gown best. Where did you get that tea-caddy? I don’t believe I’ve got one. Pretty good view from your window. Mine looks out on the High.”</p>
			<p>“Look here,” asked Alan very solemnly, “where shall I hang this picture my mater gave me?”</p>
			<p>He displayed in a green frame <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">The Soul’s Awakening</i>.</p>
			<p>“Do you like it?” Michael asked gloomily.</p>
			<p>“I prefer these grouse by Thorburn that the governor gave me, but I like them both in a way,” Alan admitted.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think it much matters where you hang it,” Michael said. Then, thinking Alan looked rather hurt, he added hastily: “You see it’s such a very square room that practically it might go anywhere.”</p>
			<p>“Will you have a meringue?” Alan asked, proffering a crowded plate.</p>
			<p>“A meringue?” Michael repeated.</p>
			<p>“We’re rather famous for our meringues here,” said Alan gravely. “We make them in the kitchen. I ordered a double lot in case you came in.”</p>
			<p>“You seem to have found out a good deal about Christ Church already,” Michael observed.</p>
			<p>“The House,” Alan corrected. “We call it⁠—in fact everybody calls it the House.”</p>
			<p>Michael was inclined to resent this arrogation by a college not his own of a distinct and slightly affected piece of nomenclature, and he wished he possessed enough knowledge of his own peculiar college customs to counter Alan’s display.</p>
			<p>“Well, hurry up and come out of the House,” he urged. “You can’t stay here unpacking all the afternoon.”</p>
			<p>“Why do you want to start buying things straight away?” Alan argued.</p>
			<p>“Because I know what I want,” Michael insisted.</p>
			<p>“Since when?” Alan demanded. “I’m not going to buy anything for a bit.”</p>
			<p>“Come on, come on,” Michael urged. He was in a hurry to enjoy the luxury of traversing the quads of Christ Church in company, of strolling down the High in company, of looking into shop windows in company, of finally defeating that first dismal loneliness with Alan and his company.</p>
			<p>It certainly proved to be a lavish afternoon. Michael bought three straight-grained pipes so substantially silvered that they made his own old pipes take on an attenuated vulgarity. He bought an obese tobacco jar blazoned with the arms of his college and, similarly blazoned, a protuberant utensil for matches. He bought numerous ounces of those prodigally displayed mixtures of tobacco, every one of which was vouched for by the vendor as in its own way the perfect blend. He bought his cap and his gown and was measured by the tailor for a coat of Harris tweed such as everybody seemed to wear. He found the very autotype of <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Mona Lisa</i> he coveted, and farther he was persuaded by the picture-dealer to buy for two guineas a signed proof of a small copperplate engraving of the <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.engraving">Primavera</i>. This expenditure frightened him from buying any more pictures that afternoon and seemed a violent and sudden extravagance. However, he paid a visit to the Bank where, after signing his name several times, he was presented with a check book. In order to be perfectly sure he knew how to draw a check, he wrote one then and there, and the five sovereigns the clerk shoveled out as irreverently as if they were chocolate creams, made him feel that his new checkbook was the purse of Fortunatus.</p>
			<p>Michael quickly recovered from the slight feeling of guilt that the purchase of the Botticelli print had laid upon his conscience, and in order to assert his independence in the face of Alan’s continuous dissuasion, he bought a hookah, a miniature five-barred gate for a pipe-rack, a mother-of-pearl cigarette-holder which he dropped on the pavement outside the shop and broke in pieces, and finally seven ties of knitted silk.</p>
			<p>By this time Michael and Alan had reached the Oriental Café in Cornmarket Street; and since it was now five o’clock and neither of them felt inclined to accept the responsibility of inviting the other back to tea, they went into the café and ate a quantity of hot buttered toast and particolored cakes. The only thing that marred their enjoyment and faintly disturbed their equanimity was the entrance of three exquisitely untidy undergraduates who stood for a moment in the doorway and surveyed first the crowded café in general, and then more particularly Michael and Alan with an expression of outraged contempt. After a prolonged stare one of them exclaimed in throaty scorn:</p>
			<p>“Oh, god, the place is chock full of damned freshers!”</p>
			<p>Whereupon he and his companions strode out again.</p>
			<p>Michael and Alan looked at each other abashed. The flavor had departed from the tea: the brilliant hues of the cakes had paled: the waitress seemed to have become suddenly critical and haughty. Michael and Alan paid their bill and went out.</p>
			<p>“Are you coming back to my rooms?” Michael asked. Yet secretly he half hoped that Alan would refuse. Dusk was falling, and he was anxious to be alone while the twilight wound itself about this gray city.</p>
			<p>Alan said he wanted to finish unpacking, and Michael left him quickly, promising to meet him again tomorrow.</p>
			<p>Michael did not wander far in that dusk of fading spires and towers, for a bookshop glowing like a jewel in the gloom of an ancient street lured him within. It was empty save for the owner, a low-voiced man with a thin pointed beard who as he stood there among his books seemed to Michael strangely in tune with his romantic surroundings, as much in tune as some old painting by Vandyck would have seemed leaning against the shelves of books.</p>
			<p>A little wearily, almost cynically, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lampard bade Michael good evening.</p>
			<p>“May I look round?” Michael asked.</p>
			<p>The bookseller nodded.</p>
			<p>“Just come up?” he inquired.</p>
			<p>“Today,” Michael confessed.</p>
			<p>“And what sort of books are you interested in?”</p>
			<p>“All books,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“This set of Pater for instance,” the bookseller suggested, handing Michael a volume bound in thick sea-green cloth and richly stamped with a golden monogram. “Nine volumes. Seven pounds ten, or six pounds fifteen cash.” This information he added in a note of disdainful tolerance.</p>
			<p>Michael shook his head and looked amused by the offer.</p>
			<p>“Of course, nobody really cares for books nowadays,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lampard went on. “In the early ’nineties it was different. Then everybody cared for books.”</p>
			<p>Michael resented this slur upon the generation to which he belonged.</p>
			<p>“Seven pounds ten,” he repeated doubtfully. How well those solid sea-green volumes would become the stately bookshelves of his room.</p>
			<p>“What college?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lampard. “<abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s? Ah, there used to be some great buyers there. Let me see, Lord William Vaughan, the Marquis of Montgomery’s son, was at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richard Meysey. I published his first volume of poems⁠—of course, you’ve read his books. He was at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s. Then there was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chalfont and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Weymouth. You’ve heard of The Patchbox? I still have some copies of the first number, but they’re getting very scarce. All <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s men and all great book buyers. But Oxford has changed in the last few years. I really don’t know why I go on selling books, or rather why I go on not selling them.”</p>
			<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lampard laughed and twisted his beard with fingers that were very thin and white. Outside in the darkness a footfall echoed along some entry. The sound gave to Michael a sense of communion with the past, and the ghosts of bygone loiterers were at his elbow.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps after all I will take the Pater,” he said. “Only I may not be able to pay you this term.”</p>
			<p>The bookseller smiled.</p>
			<p>“I don’t think I shall worry you. Do you know this set⁠—Boccaccio, Rabelais, Straparola, Masuccio, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Eleven guineas bound in watered silk. They’ll always keep their price, and of course all the photogravures are included.”</p>
			<p>“All right. You might send them too.”</p>
			<p>Michael could not resist the swish of the watered silk as Volume One of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Decameron</i> was put back into its vacancy. And as he hurried down to College the thought that he had spent nineteen pounds one shilling scarcely weighed against the imagination of lamplight making luminous those silken backs of faded blue and green and red and gold, against those silk markers and the consciousness that now at last he was a buyer of books, a buyer whose spirit would haunt that bookshop. He had certainly never regretted the seventeen-and-sixpence he had spent on the pirated works of Swinburne, and then he was a wretched schoolboy balanced on the top of a ladder covetous of unattainable splendors, a pitiable cipher in the accounts of Elson’s bookshop. At Lampard’s he was already a personality.</p>
			<p>All that so far happened to Michael not merely in one day at Oxford, but really during his whole life was for its embarrassment nothing in comparison with the first dinner in hall. As he walked through the Cloisters and heard all about him the burble of jolly and familiar conversation, he shuddered to think what in a minute he must face. The list of freshmen, pinned up on the board in the Lodge, was a discouraging document to those isolated members of public schools other, than Eton, Winchester, Harrow or Charterhouse. These four seemed to have produced all but six or seven of the freshmen. Eton alone was responsible for half the list. What chance, thought Michael, could he stand against such an impenetrable phalanx of conversation as was bound to ensue from such a preponderance? However, he was by now at the top of the steps that led up to hall, and a mild old butler was asking his name.</p>
			<p>“You’ll be at the second freshmen’s table. On the right, sir. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wedderburn is at the head of your table, sir.”</p>
			<p>Michael was glad to find his table at the near end of hall, and hurriedly taking his seat, almost dived into the soup that was quickly placed before him. He did not venture to open a conversation with either of his neighbors, but stared instead at the freshman occupying the armchair at the head of the table, greatly impressed by his judicial gravity of demeanor, his neat bulk and the profundity of his voice.</p>
			<p>“How do you become head of a table?” Michael’s left-hand neighbor suddenly asked.</p>
			<p>Michael said he really did not know.</p>
			<p>“Because what I’m wondering,” the left-hand neighbor continued, “is why they’ve made that ass Wedderburn head of our table.”</p>
			<p>“Why, is he an ass?” Michael inquired.</p>
			<p>“Frightful ass,” continued the left-hand neighbor, whom Michael perceived to be a small round-faced youth, very fair and very pink. “Perfectly harmless, of course. Are you an Harrovian?”</p>
			<p>Michael shook his head.</p>
			<p>“I thought you were a cousin of my mother,” said the left-hand neighbor.</p>
			<p>Michael looked astonished.</p>
			<p>“His name’s Mackintosh. What’s your name?”</p>
			<p>Michael told him.</p>
			<p>“My name’s Lonsdale. I think we’re on the same staircase⁠—so’s Mackintosh. It’s a pity he’s an Harrovian, but I promised my mother I’d look him up.”</p>
			<p>Then, after surveying the table, Lonsdale went on in a confidential undertone:</p>
			<p>“I don’t mind telling you that the Etonians up here are a pretty poor lot. There are two chaps from my house who are not so bad⁠—in fact rather good eggs⁠—but the rest! Well, look at that ass Wedderburn. He’s typical.”</p>
			<p>“I think he looks rather a good sort,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“My dear chap, he was absolutely barred. M’ tutor used to like him, but really⁠—well⁠—I don’t mind telling you, he’s really an aesthete.”</p>
			<p>With this shocked condemnation, Lonsdale turned to his other neighbor and said in his jerky and somewhat mincing voice that was perfectly audible to Michael:</p>
			<p>“I say, Tommy, this man on my right isn’t half bad. I don’t know where he comes from, His name’s Fane.”</p>
			<p>“He’s from <abbr>St.</abbr> James’.”</p>
			<p>“Where on earth’s that?”</p>
			<p>“London.”</p>
			<p>“Why, I thought it was a kind of charity school,” said Lonsdale. Then he turned to Michael again:</p>
			<p>“I say, are you really from <abbr>St.</abbr> James’?”</p>
			<p>Michael replied coldly that he was.</p>
			<p>“I say, come and have coffee with me after hall. One or two <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">O.E.</abbr>’s are coming in, but you won’t mind?”</p>
			<p>“Why, do you want to find out something about <abbr>St.</abbr> James’?” demanded Michael, frowning.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I say, don’t be ratty. It’s that ass Tommy. He always talks at the top of his voice.”</p>
			<p>Lonsdale, as he spoke, looked so charmingly apologetic and displayed such accomplished sangfroid that Michael forgave him immediately and promised to come to coffee.</p>
			<p>“Good egg!” Lonsdale exclaimed with the satisfaction of having smoothed over an awkward place. “I say,” he offered, “if you’d like to meet Wedderburn, I’ll ask him, too. He seems to have improved since he’s been up at the Varsity. Don’t you think that fat man Wedderburn has improved, Tommy?”</p>
			<p>Tommy nodded.</p>
			<p>“One day’s done him no end of good.”</p>
			<p>“I say,” Lonsdale offered, “you haven’t met Fane. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fane⁠—<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Grainger. I was just saying to Fane that the Etonians are a rotten lot this term.”</p>
			<p>“One or two are all right,” Grainger admitted with evident reluctance.</p>
			<p>“Well, perhaps two,” Lonsdale agreed. “This dinner isn’t bad, what?”</p>
			<p>By this time the conversation at the table had become more general, and Michael gradually realized that some of the alarm he had felt himself had certainly been felt by his companions. Now at any rate there was a perceptible relaxation of tension. Still the conversation was only general in so much as that whenever anybody spoke, the rest of the table listened. The moment the flow of his information dried up, somebody else began pumping forth instruction. These slightly nervous little lectures were delivered without any claim to authority and they came up prefaced by the third person of legendary narrative.</p>
			<p>“They say we shall all have to interview the Warden tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“They say on Sunday afternoon the Wagger makes the same speech to the freshers that he’s made for twenty years.”</p>
			<p>“They say we ought to go head of the river this year.”</p>
			<p>“They say the freshers are expected to make a bonner on Sunday night.”</p>
			<p>“They say anyone can have commons of bread and cheese by sending out word to the buttery. It’s really included in the two-and-fourpence for dinner.”</p>
			<p>“They say they charge a penny for the napkin every night.”</p>
			<p>So the information proceeded, and Michael had just thought to himself that going up to Oxford was very much like going to school again, when from the second-year tables crashed the sound of a concerted sneeze. The dons from high table looked coldly down the hall, expressing a vague, but seemingly impotent disapproval, for immediately afterward that sternutation shook the air a second time.</p>
			<p>Michael thought the difference between school and Oxford might be greater than he had supposed.</p>
			<p>The slowest eater at the second freshmen’s table had nervously left half his savory; Wedderburn without apparent embarrassment had received the Sub-Warden’s permission to rise from dinner; Lonsdale hurriedly marshaled as many of his acquaintances as he could, and in a large and noisy group they swarmed through the moonlight toward his rooms.</p>
			<p>Michael was interested by Lonsdale’s sitting-room, for he divined at once that it was typical, just a transplanted Eton study with the addition of smoking paraphernalia. The overmantel was plumed with small photographs of pleasant young creatures in the gay nautical costumes of the Fourth of June and festooned hats of Alexandra or Monarch, of the same pleasant young creatures at an earlier and chubbier age, of the same pleasant young creatures with penciled mustaches and the white waistcoat of Pop. In addition to their individual commemorations the pleasant young creatures would appear again in house groups, in winning house elevens, and most exquisitely of all in Eton Society. Michael always admired the photographs of Pop, for they seemed to him to epitomize all the traditions of all the public-schools of England, to epitomize them moreover with something of that immortality of captured action expressed by great Athenian sculpture. In comparison with Pop the Harrow Philathletic Society was a barbarous group, with all the self-consciousness of a deliberate archaism. Besides the personal photographs in Lonsdale’s room there were studies of grouse by Thorburn; and Michael, remembering Alan’s grouse, felt in accord with Lonsdale and with all that Lonsdale stood for. Knowing Alan, he felt that he knew Lonsdale, and at once he became more at ease with all his contemporaries in Lonsdale’s room. Michael looked at the colored prints of Cecil Aldin’s pictures and made up his mind he would buy a set for Alan: also possibly he would buy for Alan the <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Sir Galahad</i> of Watts which was rather better than <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">The Soul’s Awakening</i>.</p>
			<p>After Lonsdale’s pictures Michael surveyed Lonsdale’s books, the brilliantly red volumes of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Jorrocks</i>, the two or three odd volumes of the Badminton library, and the school books tattered and ink-splashed. More interesting than such a library were the glossy new briars, the virgin meerschaum, the patent smoking-tables and another table evidently designed to make drinking easy, but by reason of the complexity of its machinery actually more likely to discourage one forever from refreshment. The rest of the space, apart from the furniture bequeathed by the noisy Templeton-Collins when he moved to larger rooms above, was crowded with the freshmen whom after hall Lonsdale had so hastily gathered together unassorted.</p>
			<p>“I ordered coffee for sixteen,” announced the host. “I thought it would be quicker than making it in a new machine that my sister gave me. It just makes enough for three, and the only time I tried, it took about an hour to do that⁠ ⁠… who’ll drink port?”</p>
			<p>Michael thought the scout’s prophecies about the superfluity of Lonsdale’s wine were rather premature, for it seemed that everybody intended to drink port.</p>
			<p>“I believe this is supposed to be rather good port,” said Lonsdale.</p>
			<p>“It is jolly good,” several connoisseurs echoed.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know much about it myself. But my governor’s supposed to be rather a judge. He said ‘this is wasted on you and your friends, but I haven’t got any bad wine to give you.’ ”</p>
			<p>Here everybody held up their glasses against the light, took another sip and murmured their approval.</p>
			<p>“Do you think this is a good wine, Fane?” demanded Lonsdale, thereby drawing so much attention to Michael that he blushed to nearly as deep a color as the port itself.</p>
			<p>“I like it very much,” Michael said.</p>
			<p>“Do you like it, Wedderburn?” asked Lonsdale, turning to the freshman who had sat in the armchair at the head of the second table.</p>
			<p>“Damned good wine,” pronounced Wedderburn in a voice so rich with appreciation and so deep with judgment that he immediately established a reputation for worldly knowledge, and from having been slightly derided at Eton for his artistic ambitions was ever afterward respected and consulted. Michael envied his air of authority, but trembled for Wedderburn’s position when he heard him reproach Lonsdale for his lack of any good pictures.</p>
			<p>“You might stick up one that can be looked at for more than two seconds,” Wedderburn said severely.</p>
			<p>“What sort of picture?” asked Lonsdale.</p>
			<p>“<i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Primavera</i>, for instance,” Wedderburn suggested, and Michael’s heart beat in sympathy.</p>
			<p>“Never heard of the horse,” Lonsdale answered. “Who owned her?”</p>
			<p>“My god,” Wedderburn rumbled, “I’ll take you to buy one tomorrow, Lonny. You deserve it after that.”</p>
			<p>“Right-O!” Lonsdale cheerfully agreed. “Only I don’t want my room to look like the Academy, you know.”</p>
			<p>Wedderburn shook his head in benevolent contempt, and the conversation was deflected from Lonsdale’s artistic education by a long-legged Wykehamist with crisp chestnut hair and a thin florid face of dimpling smiles.</p>
			<p>“Has anybody been into Venner’s yet?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“I have,” proclaimed a dumpy Etonian whose down-curving nose hung over a perpetually open mouth. “Marjoribanks took me in just before hall. But he advised me not to go in by myself yet awhile.”</p>
			<p>“The second-year men don’t like it,” agreed the long-legged Wykehamist with a wise air. “They say one can begin to go in occasionally in one’s third term.”</p>
			<p>“What is Venner’s?” Michael asked.</p>
			<p>“Don’t you know?” sniffed the dumpy Etonian who had already managed to proclaim his friendship with Marjoribanks, the President of the Junior Common Room, and therefore presumably had the right to open his mouth a little wider than usual at Michael.</p>
			<p>“I’m not quite sure myself,” said Lonsdale quickly. “I vote that Cuffe explains.”</p>
			<p>“I’m not going to explain,” Cuffe protested, and for some minutes his mouth was tightly closed.</p>
			<p>“Isn’t it just a sort of special part of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">J.C.R.</abbr>?” suggested the smiling Wykehamist, who seemed to wish to make it pleasant for everybody, so long as he himself would not have to admit ignorance. “Old Venables himself is a ripper. They say he’s been steward of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">J.C.R.</abbr> for fifty years.”</p>
			<p>“Thirty-two years,” corrected Wedderburn in his voice of most reverberant certitude. “Venner’s is practically a club. You aren’t elected, but somehow you know just when you can go in without being stared at. There’s nothing in Oxford like that little office of Venner’s. It’s practically made <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s what it is.”</p>
			<p>All the freshmen, sipping their port and lolling back in their new gowns, looked very reverent and very conscious of the honor and glory of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s which they themselves hoped soon to affirm more publicly than they could at present. Upon their meditations sounded very loud the blast of a coach-horn from above.</p>
			<p>“That’s Templeton-Collins,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“Who’s he?” several demanded.</p>
			<p>“He’s the man who used to live in these rooms last year,” said Lonsdale lightly, as if that were the most satisfactory description for these freshmen, as indeed for all its youthful heartlessness it was.</p>
			<p>“Let’s all yell and tell him to shut up that infernal row,” suggested Wedderburn sternly. Already from sitting in an armchair at the head of a table of freshmen he was acquiring an austere seniority of his own.</p>
			<p>“To a second-year blood?” whispered somebody in dread surprise.</p>
			<p>“Why not take away the coach-horn?” Lonsdale added.</p>
			<p>However, this the freshmen were not prepared to do, although with unanimity they invited Templeton-Collins to refrain from blowing it.</p>
			<p>“Keep quiet, little boys,” shouted Templeton-Collins down the stairs.</p>
			<p>The sixteen freshmen retreated well pleased with their audacity, and the long-legged Wykehamist proclaimed delightedly that this was going to be a hot year. “I vote we have a bonner.”</p>
			<p>“Will you light it, Sinclair?” asked another Wykehamist in a cynical drawl.</p>
			<p>“Why not?” Sinclair retorted.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I don’t know. But you always used to be better at theory than practice.”</p>
			<p>“How these Wykehamists love one another,” laughed an Etonian.</p>
			<p>This implied criticism welded the four Winchester men present in defiance of all England, and Michael was impressed by their haughty and bigoted confidence.</p>
			<p>“Sunday night is the proper time for a bonner,” said Wedderburn. “After the first ‘after.’ ”</p>
			<p>“ ‘After’?” queried another.</p>
			<p>“Oh, don’t you know? Haven’t you heard?” several well-informed freshmen began, but Wedderburn with his accustomed gravity assumed the burden of instruction, and the others gave way.</p>
			<p>“Every Sunday after hall,” he explained, “people go up to the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">J.C.R.</abbr> and take wine and dessert. Healths are drunk, and of course the second-year men try to make the freshers blind. Then everybody goes round to one of the large rooms in Cloisters for the ‘after Common Room.’ People sing and do various parlor tricks. The President of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">J.C.R.</abbr> gives the first ‘after’ of the term. The others are usually given by three or four men together. Whisky and cigars and lemon-squash. They usually last till nearly twelve. Great sport. They’re much better than private wines, better for everybody. That’s why we have them on Sunday night,” he concluded rather vaguely.</p>
			<p>The unwieldy bulk of sixteen freshmen was beginning to break up into bridge fours. Friendships were already in visible elaboration. The first evening had wonderfully brought them together. Something deeper than the superficial amity of chance juxtaposition at the same table was now begetting tentative confidences that would ultimately ripen to intimacies. Etonians were discovering that all Harrovians were not the dark-blue bedecked ruffians of Lords nor the aggressive boors of Etonian tradition. Harrovians were beginning to suspect that some Etonians might exist less flaccid, less deliberately lackadaisical, less odiously serene than the majority of those they had so far only encountered in summer holidays. Carthusians found that athletic prowess was going to count pleasantly in their favor. Even the Wykehamists extended a cordiality that was not positively chilling, and though they never lost an opportunity to criticize implicity all other schools, and though their manners were so perfect that they abashed all but the more debonair Etonians, still it was evident they were sincerely trying to acknowledge a little merit, a little good-fellowship among these strange new contemporaries, however exuberantly uneducated they might appear to Wykeham’s adamantine mold.</p>
			<p>Michael did not thrust himself upon any of these miniature societies in the making, because the rather conscious efforts of diverse groups to put themselves into accord with one another made him shy and restless. Nobody yet among these freshmen seemed able to take his neighbor for granted, and Michael fancied that himself as the product of a day-school appeared to these cloistered catechumens as surprising and disconcerting and vaguely improper as a ballet-girl or a French count. At the same time he sympathized with their bewilderment and gave them credit for their attempt not to let him think he confused their social outlook. But the obviously sustained attempt depressed him with a sense of fatigue. After all, his trousers were turned up at the bottom and the last button of his waistcoat was undone. Failure to comply with the Draconic code of dress could not be attributed to him, as mercilessly it had served to banish into despised darkness a few scholars whose trousers frayed themselves upon their insteps and whose waistcoats were ignobly buttoned to the very end.</p>
			<p>“An Old Giggleswickian,” commented someone in reference to one of these disgraced scholars, with such fanatic modishness that Michael was surprised to see he wore the crude tie of the Old Carthusians; such inexorable scorn consorted better with the rich sobriety of the Old Wykehamist colors.</p>
			<p>“Why, were you at school with him?” asked Michael quickly.</p>
			<p>“Me? At Giggleswick?” stammered the Carthusian.</p>
			<p>“Why not?” said Michael. “You seem to know all about him.”</p>
			<p>“Isn’t your name Fane?” demanded the Carthusian abruptly, and when Michael nodded, he said he remembered him at his private school.</p>
			<p>“That’ll help me along a bit, I expect,” Michael prophesied.</p>
			<p>“We were in the same form at Randell’s. My name’s Avery.”</p>
			<p>“I remember you,” said Michael coldly. And he thought to himself how little Avery’s once stinging wit seemed to matter now. Really he thought Avery was almost attractive with his fresh complexion and deep blue eyes and girlish sensitive mouth, and when he rose to go out of Lonsdale’s room, he was not sorry that Avery rose too and walked out with him into the quad.</p>
			<p>“I say,” Avery began impulsively. “Did I make an ass of myself just now? I mean, do you think people were sick with me?”</p>
			<p>“What for?”</p>
			<p>“I mean did I sound snobbish?” Avery pursued.</p>
			<p>“Not more than anybody else,” Michael assured him, and as he watched Avery’s expression of petulant self-reproach he wondered how it was possible that once it mattered whether Avery knew he had a governess and wore combinations instead of pants and vest.</p>
			<p>“I say, aren’t you rather keen on pictures? I heard you talking to Wedderburn. Do come up to my room some time. I’m in Cloisters. Are you going out? You’ll have to buck up. It’s after nine.”</p>
			<p>They had reached the lodge, and Michael, nodding good night, was ushered out by the porter. As he reached the corner of Longwall, Tom boomed his final warning, and over the last echoing reverberation sounded here and there the lisp of footsteps in the moonlight.</p>
			<p>Michael wandered on in meditation. From lighted windows in the High came a noise of laughter and voices that seemed to make more grave and more perdurable the spires and towers of Oxford, deepening somehow the solemnity of the black entries and the empty silver spaces before them. Michael pondered the freshmen’s chatter and apprehended dimly how this magical sublunary city would convert all that effusion of naive intolerance to her own renown. He stood still for a moment rapt in an ecstasy of submission to this austere beneficence of stone that sheltered even him, the worshiper of one day, with the power of an immortal pride. He wandered on and on through the liquid moonshine, gratefully conscious of his shadow that showed him in his cap and gown not so conspicuous an intruder as he had seemed to himself that morning.</p>
			<p>So for an hour he wandered in a tranced revelry of aspirations, until at last breathlessly he turned into the tall glooms of New College Street and Queen’s Lane, where as he walked he touched the cold stones, forgetting the world.</p>
			<p>In the High he saw his own college washed with silver, and the tower tremulous in the moonlight, finespun and frail as a lily.</p>
			<p>It was pleasant to nod to one or two people standing in the lodge. It was pleasant to turn confidently under the gateway of <abbr>St.</abbr> Cuthbert’s quad. It was pleasant to be greeted by his own name at the entrance of his staircase. It was the greatest contentment he had ever known to see the glowing of his fire, and slowly to untie under the red-shaded light the fat parcels of his newly-bought books.</p>
			<p>Outside in the High a tram rumbled slowly past. The clock struck ten from <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s tower. The wicker chair creaked comfortably. The watered silk of the rich bindings swished luxuriously. This was how Boccaccio should be read. Michael’s mind was filled with the imagination of that gay company, secluded from the fever, telling their gay stories in the sunlight of their garden. This was how Rabelais should be read: the very pages seemed to glitter like wine.</p>
			<p>Midnight chimed from <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary’s tower. One by one the new books went gloriously to their gothic shelves. The red lamp was extinguished. Michael’s bedroom was scented with the breath of the October night. It was too cold to read more than a few sentences of Pater about some splendid bygone Florentine. Out snapped the electric light: the room was full of moonshine, so full that the water in the bath tub was gleaming.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
