<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part"><section id="chapter-2-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3><a id="Chapter_II_The_Quadruple_Intrigue" name="Chapter_II_The_Quadruple_Intrigue"></a>Chapter II: <i>The Quadruple Intrigue</i></h3>
<p class="nind"><span class="letra">M</span>ICHAEL, although Stella was more of a tie than a companion, was shocked
to hear that she would not accompany Miss Carthew and himself to
Eastbourne for the summer holidays. He heard with a recurrence of the
slight jealousy he had always felt of Stella that, though she was not
yet eleven years old, she was going to Germany to live in a German
family and study music. To Michael this step seemed a device to spoil
Stella beyond the limits of toleration, and he thought with how many new
affectations Stella would return to her native land. Moreover, why
should Stella have all the excitement of going abroad and living abroad
while her brother plodded to school in dull ordinary London? Michael
felt very strongly that the balance of life was heavily weighted in
favour of girls and he deplored the blindness of grown-up people unable
to realize the greater attractiveness of boys. It was useless for
Michael to protest, although he wasted an evening of Henty in arguing
the point with Miss Carthew. Stella became primed with her own
importance before she left England, and Michael tried to discourage her
as much as he could by pointing out that in Germany her piano-playing
would be laughed at and by warning her that her so evident inclination
to show off would prejudice against her the bulk of Teutonic opinion.
However, Michael's well-meant discouragement did not at all abash
Stella, who under his most lugubrious prophecies trilled exasperatingly
cheerful scales or ostentatiously folded unimportant articles of
clothing with an exaggerated carefulness, the while she fussed with her
hair and threw conceited glances over her shoulder into the mirror.
Then, one day, the bonnet of a pink and yellow Fraulein bobbed from a
cab-window, and, after a finale of affectation and condescension on the
front-door steps for the benefit of passers-by, Stella set out for
Germany and Michael turned back into the house with pessimistic fears
for her future. The arrangements for Stella's transportation had caused
some delay in Michael's holidays, and as a reward for having been forced
to endure the sight of Stella going abroad, he was told that he might
invite a friend to stay with him at Eastbourne during the remainder of
the time. Such an unexpected benefaction made Michael incredulous at
first.</p>
<p>"Anyone I like?" he said. "For the whole of the hols? Good Lord, how
ripping."</p>
<p>Forthwith he set out to consider the personal advantages of all his
friends in turn. The Macalisters as twins were ruled out; besides, of
late the old intimacy was wearing thin, and Michael felt there were
other chaps with more claim upon him. Norton was ruled out, because it
would be the worst of bad form to invite him without the Macalisters and
also because Norton was no longer on the Classical side of St. James'.
Suddenly the idea of asking Merivale to stay with him occurred like an
inspiration. Merivale was not at present a friend with anything like the
pretensions of Norton or the Macalisters. Merivale could not be
visualized in earliest Randell days, indeed he had been at a different
private school, and it was only during this last summer term that he and
Michael had taken to walking arm in arm during the 'quarter.' Merivale
turned to the left when he came out of school and Michael turned to the
right, so that they never met on their way nor walked home together
afterwards. Nevertheless, in the course of the term, the friendship had
grown, and once or twice Michael and Merivale had sat beneath the
hawthorn trees, between them a stained bag of cherries in the long cool
grass, while intermittently they clapped the boundary hits of a school
match that was clicking drowsily its progress through the summer
afternoon. Tentative confidences had been exchanged, and by reason of
its slower advance towards intimacy the friendship of Michael and
Merivale seemed built on a firmer basis than most of the sudden
affinities of school life. Now, as Michael recalled the personality of
Merivale with his vivid blue eyes and dull gold hair and his laugh and
freckled nose and curiously attractive walk, he had a great desire for
his company during the holidays. Miss Carthew was asked to write to Mrs.
Merivale in order to give the matter the weight of authority; but
Michael and Miss Carthew went off to Eastbourne before the answer
arrived. The sea sparkled, a cool wind blew down from Beachy Head; the
tamarisks on the front quivered; Eastbourne was wonderful, so wonderful
that Michael could not believe in the probability of Merivale, and the
more he thought about it, the more he felt sure that Mrs. Merivale would
write a letter of polite refusal. However, as if they were all people in
a book, everything happened according to Michael's most daringly
optimistic hopes. Mrs. Merivale wrote a pleasant letter to Miss Carthew
to say that her boy Alan was just now staying at Brighton with his uncle
Captain Ross, that she had written to her brother who had written back
to say that Alan and he would move on to Eastbourne, as it did not
matter a bit to him where he spent the next week. Mrs. Merivale added
that, if it were convenient, Alan might stay on with Michael when his
uncle left. By the same post came a letter from Merivale himself to say
that he and his uncle Kenneth were arriving next day, and that he jolly
well hoped Fane was going to meet him at the railway station.</p>
<p>Michael, much excited, waited until the train steamed in with its
blurred line of carriage windows, from one of which Merivale was
actually leaning. Michael waved: Merivale waved: the train stopped:
Merivale jumped out: a tall man with a very fair moustache and
close-cropped fair hair alighted after Merivale and was introduced and
shook hands and made several jokes and was on terms of equality before
he and Merivale and Michael had got into the blue-lined fly that was to
drive them to Captain Ross's hotel. During the few days of Captain
Ross's stay, he and Michael and Merivale and Miss Carthew went sailing
and climbed up Beachy Head and watched a cricket match in Devonshire
Park and generally behaved like all the other summer visitors to
Eastbourne. Michael noticed that Captain Ross was very polite to Miss
Carthew and heard with interest that they both had many friends in
common—soldiers and sailors and Royal Marines. Michael listened to a
great deal of talk about 'when I was quartered there' and 'when he was
stationed at Malta' and about Gunners and Sappers and the Service. He
himself spoke of General Mace and was greatly flattered when Captain
Ross said he knew him by reputation as a fine old soldier. Michael was
rather disappointed that Captain Ross was not in the Bengal Lancers, but
he concluded that next to being in the Bengal Lancers, it was best to be
with him in the Kintail Highlanders (the Duke of Clarence's own
Inverness-shire Buffs).</p>
<p>"Uncle Ken looks jolly ripping in a kilt," Merivale informed Miss
Carthew, when on the last evening of Captain Ross's stay they were all
sitting in the rubied light of the hotel table.</p>
<p>"Shut up, showman," said Captain Ross, banging his nephew on the head
with a Viennese roll.</p>
<p>"Oh, I say, Uncle Kenneth, that loaf hurts most awfully," protested
Merivale.</p>
<p>"Well, don't play Barnum," said the Captain as he twirled his little
moustache. "It's not done, my lad."</p>
<p>When Captain Ross went away next morning, Miss Carthew at his earnest
invitation accompanied the boys to see him off, and, as they walked out
of the station, Merivale nudged Michael to whisper:</p>
<p>"I say, I believe my uncle's rather gone on Miss Carthew."</p>
<p>"Rot," said Michael. "Why, she'd be most frightfully annoyed. Besides,
chaps' uncles don't get gone on——" Michael was going to add 'chaps'
sisters' governesses,' but somehow he felt the remark was all wrong, and
blushed the conclusion of the sentence.</p>
<p>The weather grew very hot, and Miss Carthew took to sitting in a canvas
chair and reading books on the beach, so that Michael and Merivale were
left free to do very much as they wanted which, as Michael pointed out,
was rather decent of her.</p>
<p>"I say, Merivale," Michael began one day, as he and his friend, arm in
arm, were examining the credentials of the front on a shimmering
morning, "I say, did you notice that Miss Carthew called you Alan?"</p>
<p>"I know. She often does," replied Merivale.</p>
<p>"I say, Merivale," said Michael shyly, "supposing I call you Alan and
you call me Michael—only during the hols, of course," he added hastily.</p>
<p>"I don't mind," Alan agreed.</p>
<p>"Because I suppose there couldn't be two chaps more friends than you and
me," speculated Michael.</p>
<p>"I like you more than I do any other chap," said Alan simply.</p>
<p>"So I do you," said Michael. "And it's rather decent just to have one
great friend who you call by his Christian name."</p>
<p>After this Michael and Alan became very intimate and neither held a
secret from the other, as through the crowds of seaside folk they
threaded their way along the promenade to whatever band of minstrels had
secured their joint devotion. They greatly preferred the Pierrots to
the Niggers, and very soon by a week's unbroken attendance at the three
daily sessions, Michael and Alan knew the words and music of most of the
repertory. Of the comic songs they liked best The Dandy Coloured Coon,
although they admired almost equally a duet whose refrain was:</p>
<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" summary="">
<tr><td align="left">"We are a couple of barmy chaps, hush, not a word!</td></tr>
<tr><td align="left">  A little bit loose in our tiles, perhaps, hush, not a word!</td></tr>
<tr><td align="left">  We're lunatics, lunatics, everybody declares</td></tr>
<tr><td align="left">  We're a couple of fellows gone wrong in our bellows,</td></tr>
<tr><td align="left">  As mad as a pair of March hares."</td></tr>
</table>
<p>Gradually, however, and more especially under the influence of Japanese
lanterns and a moon-splashed sea, Michael and Alan avowed openly their
fondness for the more serious songs sung by the Pierrettes. The words of
one song in particular were by a reiteration of passionate utterance
deeply printed on their memory:</p>
<table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" summary="">
<tr><td align="left">"Two little girls in blue, lad,</td></tr>
<tr><td align="left"><span style="margin-left: .35em;">Two little girls in blue,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td align="left"><span style="margin-left: .35em;">They were sisters, we were brothers,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td align="left"><span style="margin-left: .35em;">And learnt to love the two.</span></td></tr>
<tr><td align="left"> </td></tr>
<tr><td align="left"><span style="margin-left: .35em;">And one little girl in blue, lad,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td align="left"><span style="margin-left: .35em;">Who won your father's heart,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td align="left"><span style="margin-left: .35em;">Became your mother: I married the other,</span></td></tr>
<tr><td align="left"><span style="margin-left: .35em;">And now we have drifted apart."</span></td></tr>
</table>
<p>This lyric seemed to Michael and Alan the most profoundly moving
accumulation of words ever known. The sad words and poignant tune wrung
their hearts with the tears always imminent in life. This lyric
expressed for the two boys the incommunicable aspirations of their most
sacred moments. As they leaned over the rail of the promenade and gazed
down upon the pretty Pierrette whose tremolo made the night air vibrant
with emotion, Michael and Alan were moved by a sense of fleeting time,
by thoughts of old lovers and by an intense self-pity.</p>
<p>"It's frightfully decent, isn't it?" murmured Michael.</p>
<p>"Ripping," sighed Alan. "I wish I could give her more than a penny."</p>
<p>"So do I," echoed Michael. "It's beastly being without much tin."</p>
<p>Then 'Encore' they both shouted as the Pierrette receded from the
crimson lantern-light into obscurity. Again she sang that song, so that
when Michael and Alan looked solemnly up at the stars, they became
blurred. They could not bear The Dandy Coloured Coon on such a night,
and, seeing no chance of luring Pierrette once more into the
lantern-light, they pushed their way through the crowd of listeners and
walked arm in arm along the murmurous promenade.</p>
<p>"It's beastly rotten to go to bed at a quarter past nine," Michael
declared.</p>
<p>"We can talk up in our room," suggested Alan.</p>
<p>"I vote we talk about the Pierrots," said Michael, affectionately
clasping his chum's arm.</p>
<p>"Yes, I vote we do too," Alan agreed.</p>
<p>The next day the Pierrots were gone. Apparently they had had a quarrel
with the Corporation and moved farther along the South Coast. Michael
and Alan were dismayed, and in their disgust forsook the beach for the
shrubberies of Devonshire Park where in gloomy by-ways, laurel-shaded,
they spoke quietly of their loss.</p>
<p>"I wonder if we shall ever see that girl again," said Michael. "I'd know
her anywhere. If I was grown up I'd know her. I swear I would."</p>
<p>"She was a clinker," Alan regretted.</p>
<p>"I don't suppose we shall ever see a girl half as pretty," Michael
thought.</p>
<p>"Not by a long chalk," Alan agreed. "I don't suppose there is a girl
anywhere in the world a quarter as pretty. I think that girl was simply
fizzing."</p>
<p>They paced the mossy path in silence and suddenly round a corner came
upon a bench on which were seated two girls in blue dresses. Michael and
Alan found the coincidence so extraordinary that they stared hard, even
when the two girls put their heads down and looked sidelong and giggled
and thumped each other and giggled again.</p>
<p>"I say, are you laughing at us?" demanded Michael.</p>
<p>"Well, you looked at us first," said the fairer of the two girls.</p>
<p>In that moment Michael fell in love.</p>
<p>"Come away," whispered Alan. "They'll follow us if we don't."</p>
<p>"Do you think they're at all decent?" asked Michael. "Because if you do,
I vote we talk to them. I say, Alan, do let's anyway, for a lark."</p>
<p>"Supposing anyone we know saw us?" queried Alan.</p>
<p>"Well, we could say <i>some</i>thing," Michael urged. He was on fire to
prosecute this adventure and, lest Alan should still hold back, he took
from his pocket a feverish bag of Satin Pralines and boldly offered them
to the girl of his choice.</p>
<p>"I say, would you like some tuck?"</p>
<p>The girls giggled and sat closer together; but Michael still proffered
the sweets and at last the girl whom he admired dipped her hand into the
bag. As all the Satin Pralines were stuck together, she brought out half
a dozen and was so much embarrassed that she dropped the bag, after
which she giggled.</p>
<p>"It doesn't matter a bit," said Michael. "I can get some more. These are
beastly squashed. I say, what's your name?"</p>
<p>So began the quadruple intrigue of Dora and Winnie and Michael and
Alan.</p>
<p>Judged merely by their dress, one would have unhesitatingly set down
Dora and Winnie as sisters; but they were unrelated and dressed alike
merely to accentuate, as girl friends do, the unanimity of their minds.
They were both of them older by a year or more than Michael and Alan;
while in experience they were a generation ahead of either. The
possession of this did not prevent them from giggling foolishly and from
time to time looking at each other with an expression compounded of
interrogation and shyness. Michael objected to this look, inasmuch as it
implied their consciousness of a mental attitude in which neither he nor
Alan had any part. He was inclined to be sulky whenever he noticed an
exchange of glances, and very soon insisted upon a temporary separation
by which he and Dora took one path, while Alan with Winnie pursued
another.</p>
<p>Dora was a neatly made child, and Michael thought the many-pleated blue
skirt that reached down to her knees and showed as she swung along a
foam of frizzy white petticoats very lovely. He liked, too, the curve of
her leg and the high buttoned boots and the big blue bow in her curly
golden hair. He admired immensely her large shady hat trimmed with
cornflowers and the string of bangles on her wrist and her general
effect of being almost grown up and at the same time still obviously a
little girl. As for Dora's face, Michael found it beautiful with the
long-lashed blue eyes and rose-leaf complexion and cleft chin and
pouting bow mouth. Michael congratulated himself upon securing the
prettier of the two. Winnie with her grey eyes and ordinary hair and
dark eyebrows and waxen skin was certainly not comparable to this
exquisite doll of his own.</p>
<p>At first Michael was too shy to make any attempt to kiss Dora.
Nevertheless the kissing of her ran in his mind from the beginning, and
he would lie awake planning how the feat was to be accomplished. He was
afraid that if suddenly he threw his arms round her, she might take
offence and refuse to see him again. Finally he asked Alan's advice.</p>
<p>"I say, have you ever kissed Winnie?" he called from his bed.</p>
<p>Through the darkness came Alan's reply:</p>
<p>"Rather not. I say, have you?"</p>
<p>"Rather not." Then Michael added defiantly, "But I jolly well wish I
had."</p>
<p>"She wouldn't let you, would she?"</p>
<p>"That's what I can't find out," Michael said despondently. "I've held
her hand and all that sort of rot, and I've talked about how pretty I
think she is, but it's beastly difficult. I say, you know, I don't
believe I should ever be able to propose to a girl—you know—a girl you
could marry—a lady. I'm tremendously gone on Dora and so are you on
Winnie. But I don't think they're ladies, because Dora's got a sister
who's in a pantomime and wears tights, so you see I couldn't propose to
her. Besides, I should feel a most frightful fool going down on my knees
in the path. Still I must kiss her somehow. Look here, Alan, if you
promise faithfully you'll kiss Winnie to-morrow, when the clock strikes
twelve, I'll kiss Dora. Will you? Be a decent chap and kiss Winnie, even
if you aren't beastly keen, because I am. So will you, Alan?"</p>
<p>There was a minute's deliberation by Alan in the darkness, and then he
said he would.</p>
<p>"I say, you are a clinker, Alan. Thanks most awfully."</p>
<p>Michael turned over and settled himself down to sleep, praying for the
good luck to dream of his little girl in blue.</p>
<p>On the next morning Alan and Michael eyed each other bashfully across
the breakfast table, conscious as they were of the guilty vow not yet
fulfilled. Miss Carthew tried in vain to make them talk. They ate in
silence, oppressed with resolutions. They saw Winnie and Dora in
Devonshire Park at eleven o'clock, and presently went their different
ways along the mazy paths. Michael talked of subjects most remote from
love. He expounded to Dora the ranks of the British Army; he gave her
tips on birds'-nesting; he told her of his ambition to join the Bengal
Lancers and he boasted of the exploits of the St. James' Football
Fifteen. Dora giggled the minutes away, and at five minutes to twelve
they were on a seat, screened against humanity's intrusion. Michael
listened with quickening pulses to the thump of tennis balls in the
distance. At last he heard the first stroke of twelve and looked
apprehensively towards Dora. Four more strokes sounded, but Michael
still delayed. He wondered if Alan would keep his promise. He had heard
no scream of dismay or startled giggle from the shrubbery. Then as the
final stroke of midday crashed forth, he flung his arms round Dora,
pressed her to him and in his confusion kissed very roughly the tilted
tip of her nose.</p>
<p>"Oh, you cheek!" she gasped.</p>
<p>Then Michael kissed her lips, coldly though they were set against his
love.</p>
<p>"I say, kiss me," he whispered, with a strange new excitement crimsoning
his cheeks and rattling his heart so loudly that he wondered if Dora
noticed anything.</p>
<p>"Shan't!" murmured Dora.</p>
<p>"Do."</p>
<p>"Oh, I couldn't," she said, wriggling herself free. "You have got a
cheek. Fancy kissing anyone."</p>
<p>"Dora, I'm frightfully gone on you," affirmed Michael, choking with the
emotional declaration. "Are you gone on me?"</p>
<p>"I like you all right," Dora confessed.</p>
<p>"Well then, do kiss me. You might. Oh, I say, do."</p>
<p>He leaned over and sought those unresponsive lips that, mutely cold, met
his. He spent a long time trying to persuade her to give way, but Dora
protested she could not understand why people kissed at all, so silly as
it was.</p>
<p>"But it's not," Michael protested. "Or else everybody wouldn't want to
do it."</p>
<p>However, it was useless to argue with Dora. She was willing to put her
curly golden head on his shoulder, until he nearly exploded with
sentiment; she seemed not to mind how often he pressed his lips to hers;
but all the time she was passive, inert, drearily unresponsive. The
deeper she seemed to shrink within herself and the colder she stayed,
the more Michael felt inclined to hurt her, to shake her roughly, almost
to draw blood from those soft lifeless lips. Once she murmured to him
that he was hurting her, and Michael was in a quandary between an
overwhelming softness of pity and an exultant desire to make her cry out
sharply with pain. Yet as he saw that golden head upon his shoulder, the
words and tune of 'Two little girls in blue' throbbed on the air, and
with an aching fondness Michael felt his eyes fill with tears. Such love
as his for Dora could never be expressed with the eloquence and passion
it demanded.</p>
<p>Michael and Alan had tacitly agreed to postpone all discussion of their
passionate adventure until the blackness of night and secret intimacy of
their bedroom made the discussion of it possible.</p>
<p>"I say, I kissed Dora this morning," announced Michael.</p>
<p>"So did I Winnie," said Alan.</p>
<p>"She wouldn't kiss me, though," said Michael.</p>
<p>"Wouldn't she?" Alan echoed in surprize, "Winnie kissed me."</p>
<p>"She didn't!" exclaimed Michael.</p>
<p>"She did, I swear she did. She kissed me more than I kissed her. I felt
an awful fool. I nearly got up and walked away. Only I didn't like to."</p>
<p>"Good Lord," apostrophized Michael. He was staggered by Alan's success
and marvelled that Alan, who was admittedly less clever than himself,
should conquer when he had failed. He could not understand the reason;
but he supposed that Dora, being so obviously the prettier, was
deservedly the more difficult to win. However, Michael felt disinclined
to pursue the subject, because it was plain that Alan took no credit to
himself for his success, and he wished still to be the leader in their
friendship. He did not want Alan to feel superior in anything.</p>
<p>The next day Miss Carthew was laid up in bed with a sick headache, so
that Michael and Alan were free to take Dora and Winnie upon the
promenade without the risk of detection. Accordingly, when they met in
Devonshire Park, Michael proposed this public walk. He was the more
willing to go, because since Alan's revelation of Winnie, he took a
certain pleasure in denying to her the attraction of Alan's company.
Winnie was not very anxious for the walk, but Dora seemed highly
pleased, and Dora, being the leader of the pair, Winnie had to give way.
While they strolled up and down the promenade in a row, Dora pointed out
to Michael and Alan in how many respects they both failed to conform to
the standards of smartness, as she conceived them. For instance, neither
of them carried a stick and neither of them wore a tie of any
distinction. Dora called their attention to the perfectly dressed youths
of the promenade with their high collars and butterfly ties and Wanghee
canes and pointed boots and vivid waistcoats.</p>
<p>After the walk the boys discussed Dora's criticism and owned that she
was right. They marshalled their money and bought made-up bow-ties of
purple and pink that were twisted round the stud with elastic and held
in position by a crescent of whalebone. They bought made-up white silk
knotted ties sown with crimson fleurs-de-lys and impaled with a
permanent brass horseshoe. They spent a long time in the morning
plastering back their hair with soap and water, while in the ribbons of
their straw hats they pinned inscribed medallions. Finally they
purchased Wanghee canes and when they met their two little girls in
blue, the latter both averred that Michael and Alan were much improved.</p>
<p>Miss Carthew remained ill for two or three days; so Michael and Alan
were able to display themselves and their sweethearts all the length of
the promenade. They took to noticing the cut of a coat as it went by and
envied the pockets of the youths they met; they envied, too, the collars
that surrounded the adolescent neck, and wished the time had come for
them to wear 'chokers.' Sometimes, before they undressed, they would try
to pin round their necks stiff sheets of note-paper in order to gauge,
however slightly, the effect of high collars on their appearance.</p>
<p>The weather was now steadily fine and hot, and Michael begged Miss
Carthew to let him and Alan buy two blazers and cricket belts. Somewhat
to his surprize, she made no objection, and presently Michael and Alan
appeared upon the front in white trousers, blue and yellow blazers and
cherry-coloured silk belts fastened in front by a convenient metal
snake. Dora thought they looked 'all right,' and, as Miss Carthew had
succumbed again to her headache, Michael and Alan were free to swagger
up and down on the melting asphalt of the promenade. Miss Carthew grew
no better, and one day she told the boys that Nancy was coming down to
look after them. Michael did not know whether he were really glad or
not, because, fond as he was of Nancy, he was deeply in love with Dora
and he had a feeling that Nancy would interfere with the intrigues. In
the end, as it happened, Nancy arrived by some mistake on the day before
she was expected and, setting forth to look for the boys, she walked
straight into them arm in arm with Dora and Winnie. Michael was very
much upset, and told the girls to scoot, a command which they obeyed by
rushing across the road, giggling loudly, standing on the opposite curb
and continuing to giggle.</p>
<p>"Hullo!" said Nancy, "who are your young friends in blue cashmere?"</p>
<p>Michael blushed and said quickly they were friends of Alan, but Alan
would not accept the responsibility.</p>
<p>"Well, I don't admire your taste," said Nancy contemptuously. "No, and I
don't admire your get-up," she went on. "Did you pick those canes up on
the beach, what?"</p>
<p>"We bought them," said Michael, rather affronted.</p>
<p>"My goodness," said Nancy. "What dreadful-looking things. I say,
Michael, you're in a fair way towards looking like a thorough young
bounder. Don't you come to Cobble Place with that button on your hat.
Well, don't let me disturb you. Cut off to the Camera Obscura with
Gertie and Evangeline. I don't expect I'm smart enough for you two."</p>
<p>"We don't particularly want to go with those girls," said Michael,
looking down at his boots, very red and biting his under-lip. Alan was
blushing too and greatly abashed.</p>
<p>"Well," said the relentless Nancy, "it's a pity you don't black your
faces, for I never saw two people look more like nigger minstrels. Where
<i>did</i> you get that tie? No wonder my sister feels bad. That belt of
yours, Michael, would give a South Sea Islander a headache. Go on, hurry
off like good little boys," she jeered. "Flossie and Cissie are waiting
for you."</p>
<p>Michael could not help admitting, as he suffered this persiflage from
Nancy, that Dora and Winnie did look rather common, and he wished they
would not stand, almost within earshot, giggling and prodding each
other. Then suddenly Michael began to hate Dora and the quadruple
intrigue was broken up.</p>
<p>"I say, Alan," he said, looking up again, "let's bung these sticks into
the sea. They're rotten sticks."</p>
<p>Alan at once threw his as far as it would go and betted Michael he would
not beat the distance. So Michael's stick followed its companion into
oblivion. Nancy was great sport, after all, as both boys admitted, and
when Michael grazed his finger very slightly on a barnacled rock, he
bandaged it up with his silk tie. Very soon he discovered the cut was
not at all serious, but he announced the tie was spoilt and dipped it
casually into a rock pool, where it floated blatantly among the anemones
and rose-plumed seaweed. Alan's tie vanished less obtrusively: no one
noticed when or where. As for the buttons inscribed with mottoes they
became insignificant units in the millions of pebbles on the beach.</p>
<p>Nancy was great sport and ready to do whatever the boys suggested in the
way of rock-climbing and walking, provided they would give her due
notice, so that she could get into a hockey skirt and thick shoes. They
had fine blowy days with Nancy up on Beachy Head above the sparkling
blue water. They caught many blue butterflies, but never the famous
Mazarin blue which legend in the butterfly-book said had once been taken
near Eastbourne.</p>
<p>Michael and Alan, even in the dark privacy of their room, did not speak
again of Dora and Winnie. Michael had an idea that Alan had always been
ashamed of the business, and felt mean when he thought how he had openly
told Nancy that they were his friends. Once or twice, when Michael was
lying on his back, staring up at the sky over Beachy Head, the wind
lisping round him sadly made him feel sentimental, but sentimental in a
dominion where Dora and Winnie were unknown, where they would have been
regarded as unpleasant intruders. Up here in the daisy's eye, the two
little girls in blue seemed tawdry and took their place in the
atmosphere of Michael's earlier childhood with Mrs. Frith's tales and
Annie's love-letters. For Michael the whole affair now seemed like the
half-remembered dreams which, however pleasant at the time, repelled him
in the recollection of them. Moreover, he had experienced a sense of
inequality in his passion for Dora. He gave all: she returned nothing.
Looking back at her now under the sailing clouds, he thought her nose
was ugly, her mouth flabby, her voice odious and her hair beastly. He
blushed at the memory of the ridiculous names he had called her, at the
contemplation of his enthusiastic praise of her beauty to Alan. He was
glad that Alan had been involved, however unwillingly. Otherwise he was
almost afraid he would have avoided Alan in future, unable to bear the
injury to his pride. This sad sensation promoted by the wind in the
grasses, by the movement of the clouds and the companionship of Alan and
Nancy, was more thrilling than the Pierrette's tremolo in the lantern
light. Michael's soul was flooded with a vast affection for Alan and for
Nancy. He wished that they all could stay here in the wind for ever. It
was depressing to think of the autumn rain and the dreary gaslit hours
of afternoon school. And yet it was not depressing at all, for he and
Alan might be able to achieve the same class. It would be difficult, for
Michael knew that he himself must inevitably be moved up two forms,
while Alan was only in the Upper Third now and could scarcely from being
ninth in his class get beyond the Lower Fourth, even if he escaped the
Shell. How Michael wished that Alan could go into the Special for a
time, and how pleasant it would be suddenly to behold Alan's entrance
into his class, so that, without unduly attracting attention, he could
manage to secure a desk for Alan next to himself.</p>
<p>But when Michael and Alan (now again the austere Fane and Merivale) went
back to school, Michael was in the Middle Fourth, and Alan just missed
the double remove and inherited Michael's scrabbled desk in the Shell.</p>
		</section></section>
	</body>
</html>
