<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV: Leppard Street</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-4" id="chapter-4-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p epub:type="title">Leppard Street</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>While they were driving to Cheyne Walk, Michael extracted from Barnes an outline of his adventures since last they had met. The present narrative was probably not less cynical than the account of his life related to Michael on various occasions in the past; but perhaps because his imagination had already to some extent been fed by reality, he could no longer be shocked. He received the most sordid avowals calmly, neither blaming Barnes nor indulging himself with mental gooseflesh. Yet amid all the frankness accorded to him he could not find out why Barnes had changed his name. He was curious about this, because he could not conceive any shamelessness too outrageous for Barnes to reveal. It would be interesting to find out what could really make even him pause; no doubt ultimately, with the contrariness of the underworld, it would turn out to be something that Michael himself would consider trivial in comparison with so much of what Barnes had boasted. Anyway, whether he discovered the secret or not, it would certainly be interesting to study Barnes, since in him good and evil might at any moment display themselves as clearly as a hidden substance to a reagent flung into a seething alembic. It might perhaps be assuming too much to say that there was any good in him; and yet Michael was unwilling to suppose that all his conversions were merely the base drugs of a disordered morality. Apart from his philosophic value, Barnes might very actually be of service in the machinery of finding Lily.</p>
			<p>At 173 Cheyne Walk Barnes looked about him rather bitterly.</p>
			<p>“Easy enough to behave yourself in a house like this,” he commented.</p>
			<p>Here spoke the child who imagines that grown-up people have no excuse to be anything but very good. There might be something worth pursuing in that thought. A child might consider itself chained more inseverably than one who apparently possesses the perfectiveness of free-will. Had civilization complicated too unreasonably the problem of evil? It was a commonplace to suppose that the sense of moral responsibility increased with the opportunity of development, and yet after all was not the reverse true?</p>
			<p>“Why should it be easier to behave here than in Leppard Street?” Michael asked. “I do wish you could understand it’s really so much more difficult. I can’t distinguish what is wrong from what is right nearly so well as you can.”</p>
			<p>“Well, in my experience, and my experience has done its bit I can tell you,” said Barnes in self-satisfied parenthesis. “In my experience most of the difficulties in this world come from wanting something we haven’t got. I don’t care what it is⁠—a woman or a drink or a new suit of clothes. Money’ll buy any of them. Give me ten pounds a week, and I could be a bloody angel.”</p>
			<p>“Supposing I offered you half as much for three months,” suggested Michael. “Do you think you’d find life any easier while it lasted?”</p>
			<p>“Well, don’t be silly,” said Barnes. “Of course I should. If you’d walked home every night with your eyes on the gutter in case anybody had dropped a threepenny bit, you’d think it was easier. It’s not a bit of good your running me down, Fane. If you were me, you’d be just the same. Those monks at the Abbey used to jaw about holy poverty. The man who first said that ought to be walking about hell with donkey’s ears on his nob. What’s it done for me? I ask you. Why, it’s made me so that I’d steal a farthing from one blind man to palm it off as half-a-quid on another.”</p>
			<p>“Tell me about Leppard Street,” said Michael, laughing. “What’s it like?”</p>
			<p>“Well, you go and punch a few holes in a cheese rind. That’s what it looks like. And then go and think yourself a rat who’s lost all his teeth, and you’ve got what it feels like to be living in it.”</p>
			<p>“Supposing I said I’d like to try?” asked Michael. “What would you think?”</p>
			<p>“Think? I shouldn’t think two seconds. I should know you were having a game. What good’s Leppard Street to you, when you can sit here bouncing up and down all day on cushions?”</p>
			<p>“Experience,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“Oh, rats! Nothing’s experience that you haven’t had to do.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I’ll give you five pounds a week,” Michael offered, “if you’ll keep yourself free to do anything I want you to do. I shouldn’t want anything very dreadful, of course,” he added.</p>
			<p>It was difficult for Michael to persuade Barnes that he was in earnest, so difficult indeed that, even when he produced five sovereigns and offered them directly to him, he had to disclose partially his reason for wishing to go to Leppard Street.</p>
			<p>“You see, I want to find a girl,” he explained.</p>
			<p>“Well, if you go and live in Leppard Street you’ll lose the best girl you’ve got straight off. That’s all there is to it.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t understand. This girl I used to know has gone wrong, and I want to find her and marry her.”</p>
			<p>It seemed to Michael that Barnes’ manner changed in some scarcely definable way when he made this announcement. He pocketed the five pounds and invited Michael to come to Leppard Street whenever he liked. He was evidently no longer suspicious of his sincerity, and a perky, an almost cunning cordiality had replaced the disheartened cynicism of his former attitude. It encouraged Michael to see how obviously his resolve had impressed Barnes. He accepted it as an augury of good hap. Involuntarily he waited for his praise; and when Barnes made no allusion to the merit of his action, he ascribed his silence to emotion. This was proving really a most delightful example of the truth of his theory. And it was clever of Barnes⁠—it was more than clever, it was truly imaginative of him⁠—to realize without another question the need to leave for a while Cheyne Walk.</p>
			<p>“But is there a vacant room?” Michael asked in sudden dread of disappointment.</p>
			<p>“Look here, you’d better see the place before you decide on leaving here,” Barnes advised. “It isn’t a cross between Buckingham Palace and the Carlton, you know.”</p>
			<p>“I suppose it’s the name that attracts me,” said Michael. “It sounds ferocious.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know about the name, but old Ma Cleghorne who keeps the house is ferocious enough. Never mind.” He jingled the five sovereigns.</p>
			<p>“I’ll go up and pack,” said Michael. “By the way, I haven’t told you yet that I was run in last night.”</p>
			<p>“In quod you mean?” asked Barnes. “Whatever for?”</p>
			<p>“Drunk and disorderly in Leicester Square.”</p>
			<p>“These coppers are the limit,” said Barnes emphatically. “The absolute limit. Really. They’ll pinch the Archbishop of Canterbury for looking into Stagg and Mantle’s window before we know where we are.”</p>
			<p>Michael left Barnes in the drawing-room, and as he turned in the doorway to see if he was at his ease, he thought the visitor and the macaw on its perch were about equally exotic.</p>
			<p>They started immediately after lunch and, as always, the drive along the river inspired Michael with a jolly conception of the adventurousness of London. It was impossible to hear the gurgle of the high spring-tide without exulting in the movement of the stream that was washing out with its flood all the listlessness of the hot August afternoon. When Chelsea Bridge was left behind, the mystery of the banks of a great river sweeping through a great city began to be more evident. The whole character of the Embankment changed at every hundred yards. First there was that somber canal which, flowing under the road straight from the Thames, reappeared between a canyon of gloomy houses and vanished again underground not very unlike the Styx. Then came what was apparently a large private house which had been gutted of the tokens of humanity and filled with monstrous wheels and cylinders and pistons, all moving perpetually and slowly with a curious absence of noise. Under Grosvenor Road Bridge they went, the horse clattering forward and a train crashing overhead. Out again from slimy bricks and girders dripping with the excrement of railway-engines, they came into Grosvenor Road. They passed the first habitations of Pimlico, two or three terraces and isolated houses all different in character. There could scarcely be another road in London so varied as this. Maurice had been wise to have his studio in Grosvenor Road. From the Houses of Parliament to Chelsea Bridge was an epitome of London.</p>
			<p>The hansom turned to the left up Clapperton Street, a very wide thoroughfare of houses with heavy porticoes, a very wide and very gray street, of a gray that almost achieved the effect of positive color, so insistent was it. Michael remembered that there had been a Clapperton Street murder, and he wondered behind which of those muslin curtains the poison had been mixed. It was a street of quite extraordinarily sinister respectableness. It brooded with a mediocre prosperity, very wide and very gray and very silent. The columns of the porticoes were checked off by the window of the cab with dull regularity, and the noise of the horse’s hoofs echoed hollowly down the empty street, to which every evening men with black shiny bags would come hurrying home. It was impossible to imagine a nursemaid lolling over a perambulator in Clapperton Street. It was impossible to imagine that anyone lived here but dried-up little men with greenish-white complexions and hatchet-shaped whiskers and gnawed mustaches, dried-up little men whose wives kept arsenic in small triangular cupboards by the bed.</p>
			<p>“I wouldn’t mind having lodgings here,” said Barnes. He had caught sight of a square of cardboard at the farther end of the street. This was the outpost of an array of apartment cards, for the next street was full of them. The next street was evidently a little nearer to the period of final dilapidation; but Michael fancied that, in comparison with the middle-aged respectableness of Clapperton Street, this older and now very swiftly decaying warren of second-rate apartments was almost attractive. Street followed street, each one, as they drew nearer to Victoria Station, being a little more raffish than its predecessor, each one being a little less able to resist the corrosion of a persistently inquinating migration. Sometimes, and with a sharp effect of contrast, occurred prosperous squares; but even these, with their houses so uniformly tall and ocherous, delivered a presage of irremediable decadency.</p>
			<p>Suddenly the long ranks of houses, which were beginning to seem endless, vanished upon the margin of a lake of railway lines. Just before the hansom would have mounted the slope of an arcuated bridge, it swung to the right into Leppard Street, <abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:place">S.W.</abbr> The beginning of the street ran between two high brown walls crowned with a ruching of broken glass: these guarded on one side the escarp of the railway, on the other a coal yard. At the farther end the street swept round to an exit between two rows of squalid dwellings called Greenarbor Court, an exit, however, that was barred to vehicles by a row of blistered posts. Some fifty yards before this the wall deviated to form a recess in which five very tall houses rose gauntly against the sky from the very edge of the embankment. Standing as they did upon a sort of bluff and flanked on either side by blind walls, these habitations gave an impression of quite exceptional height. This was emphasized by the narrow oblong windows of which there may have been nearly fifty. The houses were built of the same brick as the walls, and they had deepened from yellow to the same fuscous hue. This promontory seemed to serve as an appendix for the draff of the neighborhood’s rubbish. The ribs of an umbrella; a child’s boot; a broken sieve; rags of faded color, lay here in the gutter undisturbed, the jetsam of a deserted beach.</p>
			<p>“Here we are,” said Barnes. “Here’s Leppard Street that you’ve been so anxious to see.”</p>
			<p>“It looks rather exciting,” Michael commented.</p>
			<p>“Oh, it’s the last act of a Drury Lane melodrama I don’t think. Exciting?” Barnes repeated. “You know, Fane, there’s something wrong with you. If you think this is exciting, you’d go raving mad when I showed you some of the places where I’ve lived. Well, here we are, anyhow. Number One⁠—the corner house.”</p>
			<p>They walked up the steps which were gradually scaling in widening ulcers of decay: the handle of the bellpull hung limply forward like a parched tongue: and the iron railings of a basement strewn with potato parings were flaked with rust, and here and there decapitated.</p>
			<p>Barnes opened the door.</p>
			<p>“We’ll take your bag up to my room first, and then we’ll go downstairs and talk to Ma Cleghorne about your room, that is if you don’t change your mind when you’ve seen the inside.”</p>
			<p>Michael had no time to notice Barnes’ room very much. But vaguely he saw a rickety bed with a patchwork counterpane and frowzy recesses masked by cheap cretonnes in a pattern of disemboweled black and crimson fruits. After that glimpse they went down again over the grayish staircarpet that was worn to the very filaments. Barnes shouted to the landlady in the basement.</p>
			<p>“She’ll have a fit if she hears me calling down to her,” he said to Michael. “You see, just lately I’ve been very anxious to avoid meeting her.”</p>
			<p>He jingled with satisfaction the sovereigns in his pocket.</p>
			<p>They descended into the gloom that smelt of damp cloths and the stale soapiness of a sink. They peeped into the front room, as they went by: here a man in shirtsleeves was lying under the scattered sheets of a Sunday paper upon a bed that gave an effect of almost oriental luxury, so much was it overloaded with mattresses and coverlets. Indeed; the whole room seemed clogged with woolly stuffs, and the partial twilight of its subterranean position added to the impression of airlessness. It was as if these quilted chairs and heavy hairy curtains had suffocated everything else.</p>
			<p>“That’s Cleghorne,” said Barnes. “I reckon he’d sleep Rip van Winkle barmy.”</p>
			<p>“What’s he do?” whispered Michael, as they turned down the passage.</p>
			<p>“He snores for a living, he does,” said Barnes.</p>
			<p>They entered the kitchen, and through the dim light Michael saw the landlady with her arms plunged into a steaming cauldron. Outside, two trains roared past in contrary directions; the utensils shivered and chinked; the ceiling was obscured by pendulous garments which exhaled a moist odorousness; on the table a chine of bacon striated by the carving-knife was black with heavy-winged flies.</p>
			<p>“I’ve brought a new lodger, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne,” said Barnes.</p>
			<p>“Have you brought your five weeks’ rent owing?” she asked sourly.</p>
			<p>He laid two pounds on the table, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne immediately cheered up, if so positive an expression could be applied to a woman whose angularities seemed to forbid any display of goodwill. Michael thought she looked rather like one of the withered nettles that overhung the wall of the sunken yard outside the kitchen window.</p>
			<p>“Well, he can have the top-floor back, or he can have the double rooms on the ground floor which of course is unfurnished. Do you want me to come up and show you?”</p>
			<p>She inquired grudgingly and rubbed the palm of her hand slowly along her sharp nose as if to express a doubtful willingness.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cleghorne⁠ ⁠…” Michael began.</p>
			<p>“Mis-ter Cleghorne!” she interrupted scornfully, and immediately she began to dry her arms vigorously on a roller-towel which creaked continuously.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I don’t want to disturb him,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“Disturb him!” she sneered. “Why, half Bedlam could drive through his brains in a omnibus before he’d move a little finger to trouble hisself. Yes,” she shouted. “Yes!” Her voice mingling with the creak of the roller seemed to be grating the air itself, and with every word it grew more strident. “Why, the blessed house might burn before he’d even put on his boots, let alone go and show anyone upstairs, though his wife can work herself to the bone for him. Disturb him! Good job if anyone could disturb him. If I found a regiment of soldiers in the larder, he’d only grunt. Asthmatic! Yes, some people ’ud be very pleased to be asthmatic, if they could lie snorting on a bed from morning to night.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne’s hands were dry now, and she led the way along the passage upstairs, sniffing as she passed her crapulous husband. She unlocked the door of the ground-floor rooms, and they entered. It was not an inspiring lodging as seen thus in its emptiness, with drifts of fluff along the bare dusty boards. The unblacked grate contained some dried-up bits of orange peel; with the last summons of the late tenant the bellrope had broken, and it now lay invertebrate; by the window, catching a shaft of sunlight, stood a drain pipe painted with a landscape in cobalt-blue and probably once used as an umbrella stand.</p>
			<p>“That’s all I got for two months’ rent,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne bitterly, surveying it. “And it’s just about fit for my old man to go and bury his good-for-nothing lazy head in, and that’s all. The bedroom’s in here, of course.” She opened the folding doors whose blebs of paint had been picked off up to a certain height above the floor, possibly as far as some child had been able to reach.</p>
			<p>The bedroom was rather dustier than the sitting-room, and it was much darker owing to a number of ferns which had been glued upon the windowpanes. Through this mesh could be seen the nettle-haunted square of back garden; and beyond, over a stucco wall pocked with small pebbles, a column of smoke was belching into the sky from a stationary engine on the invisible lake of railway lines.</p>
			<p>“Do you want to see the top-floor back?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne asked.</p>
			<p>“Well, if you wouldn’t mind.” Michael felt bound to apologize to her, whatever was suggested.</p>
			<p>She sighed her way upstairs, and at last flung open a door for them to enter the vacant room.</p>
			<p>The view from here was certainly more spacious, and a great deal of the permeating depression was lightened by looking out as it were over another city across the railway, a city with streamers of smoke, and even here and there a flag flying. At the same time the room itself was less potentially endurable than the ground-floor; there was no fireplace and the few scraps of furniture were more discouraging than the positive emptiness downstairs. Michael shuddered as he looked at the gimcrack washstand through whose scanty paint the original wood was visible in long fibrous sores. He shuddered, too, at the bedstead with its pleated iron laths furred by dust and rust, and at the red mattress exuding flock like clustered maggots.</p>
			<p>“This is furnished, of course,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne, complacently sucking a tooth. “Well, which will you have?”</p>
			<p>“I think perhaps I’ll take the ground-floor rooms. I’ll have them done up.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, they’re quite clean. The last people was a bit dirty. So I gave them an extra-special clear-out.”</p>
			<p>“But you wouldn’t object to my doing them up?” persisted Michael.</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, I shouldn’t <em>object</em>,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne, and in her accent was the suggestion that equally she would not be likely to derive very much pleasure from the fruition of Michael’s proposal.</p>
			<p>They were going downstairs again now, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne was evidently beginning to acquire a conviction of her own importance, because somebody had contemplated with a certain amount of interest those two empty rooms on the ground floor; in the gratification of her pride she was endowing them with a value and a character they did not possess.</p>
			<p>“I’ve always said that, properly cared for, those two rooms are worth any other two rooms in the house. And of course that’s the reason I’m really compelled to charge a bit more for them. I always say to everyone right out⁠—if you want the two best rooms in the house, why, you must pay according. They’re only empty now because I’ve always been particular about letting them. I won’t have anybody, and that’s a fact. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Barnes here knows I’m really fond of those rooms.”</p>
			<p>They had reentered them, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne stood with arms admiringly akimbo.</p>
			<p>“They really are a beautiful lodging,” she declared. “When would you want them from?”</p>
			<p>“Well, as soon as I can get them done up,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“I see. Perhaps you could explain a little more clearly just what you was thinking of doing?”</p>
			<p>Michael gave some of his theories of decoration, while <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne waited in critical audience; as it were, feeling the pulse of the apartments under the stimulus of Michael’s sketch of their potentiality.</p>
			<p>“All white?” the landlady echoed pessimistically. “That sounds very gloomy, doesn’t it? More like a outhouse or a coal-cellar than a nice couple of rooms.”</p>
			<p>“Well, they couldn’t look rottener than what they do at present,” Barnes put in. “So if you take my advice, you’ll say ‘yes’ and be very thankful. They’ll look clean, anyway.”</p>
			<p>The landlady threw back her head and surveyed Barnes like a snake about to strike.</p>
			<p>“Rotten?” she sniffed. “I’m sure this gentleman here isn’t likely to find a nicer and cheaper pair of rooms or a more convenient and a quieter pair of rooms anywhere in Pimlico. A lot of people is very anxious to be in this neighborhood.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne was much offended by Barnes’ criticism, and there was a long period of dubiety before it was settled that Michael should be accepted as a tenant.</p>
			<p>“I’ve never cared for white,” she said, in final protest. “Not since I was married.”</p>
			<p>Reminded of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cleghorne’s existence in the basement, she hurried forthwith to rout him out. As she disappeared, Michael saw that she was searching in the musty folds of her skirt in order to deposit in her purse the month’s rent he had paid in advance.</p>
			<p>A couple of weeks passed while the decorators worked hard; and Michael returned from an unwilling visit to Scotland to find them ready for him. He got together a certain amount of furniture, and toward the end of August he moved into Leppard Street.</p>
			<p>Barnes on account of the prosperity which had come to him through Michael’s money had managed to dress himself in a series of outrageously new and fashionable suits, and on the afternoon of his patron’s arrival he strutted about the apartments.</p>
			<p>“Very nice,” he said. “Very nice, indeed. I reckon old Ma Cleghorne ought to be very pleased with herself. Some of these pictures are a bit too religious for me just at present, but everyone to their own taste, that’s what I always say. To their own taste,” he repeated. “Otherwise, what’s the good in being given an opinion of your own?”</p>
			<p>Michael felt it was time to explain to Barnes more particularly his quest of Lily.</p>
			<p>“You don’t know a girl called Lily Haden?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Lily Haden,” said Barnes thoughtfully. “Lily Hopkins. A great fat girl with red.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“No, no,” Michael interrupted. “Lily Haden. Tall. Slim. Very fair hair. Of course she may have another name now.”</p>
			<p>“That’s it, you see,” said Barnes wisely.</p>
			<p>“Wherever she is, whatever she’s doing, I must find her,” Michael went on.</p>
			<p>“Well, if you go about it in that spirit, you’ll soon find her,” Barnes prophesied.</p>
			<p>Michael looked at him sharply. He thought he noticed in Barnes’ manner a suggestion of humoring him. He rather resented the way in which Barnes seemed to encourage him as one might encourage a child.</p>
			<p>“You understand I want to marry her?” Michael asked fiercely.</p>
			<p>“That’s all right, old chap. I’m not trying to stop you, am I?”</p>
			<p>“But why are you talking as if I weren’t in earnest?” Michael demanded. “When I first told you about it you were evidently very pleased, and now you’ve got a sneer which frankly I tell you I find extraordinarily objectionable.”</p>
			<p>Barnes looked much alarmed by Michael’s sudden attack, and explained that he meant nothing by his remarks beyond a bit of fun.</p>
			<p>“Is it funny to marry somebody?” Michael demanded.</p>
			<p>“Sometimes it’s very funny to marry a tart,” said Barnes.</p>
			<p>Michael flushed. This was a directness of speech for which he was not prepared.</p>
			<p>“But when I first told you,” Michael said, “you seemed very pleased.”</p>
			<p>“I was very pleased to find I’d evidently struck a nice-mannered lunatic,” said Barnes. “You offered me five quid a week, didn’t you? Well, you didn’t offer me that to give you good advice, now did you?”</p>
			<p>Michael tried to conceal the mortification that was being inflicted upon him. He had been very near to making a fool of himself by supposing that his announcement had aroused admiration. Instead of admiring him, Barnes evidently regarded him as an idiot whom it were politic to encourage on account of the money this idiot could provide. It was an humiliating discovery. The chivalry on which he congratulated himself had not touched a single chord in Barnes. Was it likely that in Lily herself he would find someone more responsive to what he still obstinately maintained to himself was really rather a fine impulse? Michael began to feel half sorry for Barnes because he could not appreciate nobility of motive. It began to seem worth while trying to impose upon him the appreciation which he felt he owed. Michael was sorry for his uncultivated ideals, and he took a certain amount of pleasure in the thought of how much Barnes might benefit from a close association with himself. He did not regret the whim which had brought them to Leppard Street. Whatever else might happen, it would always be consoling to think that he would be helping Barnes. In half a dream Michael began to build up the vision of a newer and a finer Barnes, a Barnes with sensitiveness and decent instincts, a Barnes who would forsake very willingly the sordid existence he had hitherto led in order to rise under Michael’s guidance and help to a wider and better life. Michael suddenly experienced a sense of affection for Barnes, the affection of the missionary for the prospective convert. He forgave him his cynical acceptance of the five pounds a week, and he made up his mind not to refer to Lily again until Barnes should be able to esteem at its true value the step he proposed to take.</p>
			<p>Michael looked round at the new rooms he had succeeded in creating out of the ground floor of 1 Leppard Street. These novel surroundings would surely be strong enough to make the first impression upon Barnes. He could not fail to be influenced by this whiteness and cleanliness, so much more white and clean where everything else was dingy and vile. It was all so spare and simple that it surely must produce an effect. Barnes would see him living every day in perfect contentment with a few books and a few pictures. He must admire those cherry-red curtains and those green shelves. He must respect the cloistral air Michael had managed to import even into this warren of queer inhabitants whom as yet he had scarcely seen. It was romantic to come like this into a small secluded world which did not know him; to bring like this a fresh atmosphere into a melancholy street of human beings who lived perpetually in a social twilight. Michael’s missionary affection began to extend beyond Barnes and to embrace all the people in this house. He felt a great fondness for them, a great desire to identify himself with their aspirations, so that they would be glad to think he was living in their midst. He began to feel very poignantly that his own existence hitherto had been disgracefully unprofitable both to himself and everybody else. He was grateful that destiny had brought him here to fulfill what was plainly a purpose. But what did fate intend should be his effect upon these people? To what was he to lead them? Michael had an impulse to kneel down and pray for knowledge. He wished that Barnes were not in this white room. Otherwise he would surely have knelt down, and in the peace of the afternoon sunlight he might have resigned himself to a condition of spirit he had coveted in vain for a very long time.</p>
			<p>Just then there was a tap at the door, and a middle-aged man with blinking watery eyes and a green plush smoking-cap peeped round the corner.</p>
			<p>“Come in,” Michael cheerfully invited him.</p>
			<p>The stranger entered in a slipshod hesitant manner. He looked as if all his clothes were on the verge of coming off, so much like a frayed accordion did his trousers rest upon the carpet slippers; so wide a space of shirt was visible between the top of the trousers and the bottom of the waistcoat; so utterly amorphous was his gray alpaca coat.</p>
			<p>“What I really came down for was a match,” the stranger explained.</p>
			<p>Michael offered him a box, and with fumbling hands he stored it away in one of his pockets.</p>
			<p>“You don’t go in for puzzles, I suppose?” he asked tentatively. “But any time I can help. I’m the Solutionist, you know. Don’t let me keep you. Good afternoon, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Barnes. I’m worrying out this week’s lot in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">The Golden Penny</i> very slowly. I’ve really had a sort of a headache the last few days⁠—a very nasty headache. Do you know anything about cricketers?” he asked, turning to Michael. “Famous cricketers, of course, that is? For instance, I cannot think what this one can be.”</p>
			<p>He produced after much uncertainty a torn and dirty sheet of some penny weekly.</p>
			<p>“I’ve got all the others,” he said to Michael. “But one picture will often stump you like this. No joke intended.” He smiled feebly and pointed to a woman holding in one hand the letter <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">S</i>, in the other the letter <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">T</i>.</p>
			<p>“What about Hirst?” Michael asked.</p>
			<p>“Hirst,” repeated the Solutionist. “Her <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">S</i> <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">T</i>. That’s it. That’s it.” In his excitement he began to dribble. “I’m very much obliged to you, sir. Her <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">S</i>. <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">T</i>. Yes, that’s it.”</p>
			<p>He began to shuffle toward the door.</p>
			<p>“Anything you want solved at any time,” he said to Michael. “I’m only just upstairs, you know, in the room next to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Barnes. I shall be most delighted to solve anything⁠—anything!”</p>
			<p>He vanished, and Michael smiled to think how completely some of his problems would puzzle the Solutionist.</p>
			<p>“What’s his name?” he inquired of Barnes.</p>
			<p>“Who? Barmy Sid? Sydney Carvel, as he calls himself. Yet he makes a living at it.”</p>
			<p>“At what?” Michael asked.</p>
			<p>“Solving those puzzles and sending solutions at so much a time. He took fifteen-and-six last week, or so he told me. You can see his advertisement in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Reynolds</i>. Barmy Sid I call him. He says he used to be a conjurer and take his ten pounds a week easily. But he looks to me more like one of these here soft fellows who ought to be shut up. You should see his room. All stuck over with bits of paper. Regular dust-hole, that’s what it is. Did you hear what he said? Solve anything⁠—anything! He hasn’t solved how to earn more than ten bob a week, year in year out. Silly ⸻! That’s what he is, barmy.”</p>
			<p>Michael’s hope of entering into a close relation with all the lodgers of 1 Leppard Street was falsified. None of them except Barmy Sid once visited his rooms; nor did he find it at all easy to strike up even a staircase acquaintance. Vaguely he became aware of the various personalities that lurked behind the four stories of long narrow windows. Yet so fleeting was the population that the almost weekly arrivals and departures perpetually disorganized his attempts to observe them as individuals or to theorize upon them in the mass. No doubt Barnes himself would have left by now, had he not been sustained by Michael’s subsidy; and it was always a great perplexity to Michael how <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne managed to pay the rent, since apparently half the inquilines of a night and even some of the less transient lodgers ultimately escaped owing her money.</p>
			<p>It was a silent and a dreary house, and although children would doubtless have been a nuisance, Michael sometimes wished that the landlady’s strict regulation no longer to take them in could be relaxed. All the five houses of Leppard Street seemed to be untenanted by children, which certainly added a touch to their decrepitude. In Greenarbor Court close at hand the pavements writhed with children, and occasionally small predatory bands advanced as far as Leppard Street to play in a halfhearted manner with some of the less unpromising rubbish that was moldering there. On the steps of Number Three, two pale little girls in stammel petticoats used to sit for hours over a grocer’s shop of grit and waste paper and refined mud. They apparently belonged to the basement of Number Three, for Michael often saw them disappear below at twilight. Michael thought of the children who swarmed above the walls of the embankment before Paddington Station, and he wondered what sort of a desolate appearance these five houses must present for voyagers to and from Victoria. They must surely stand up very forbidding in abandonment to those who were traveling back to their cherished dolls-houses in Dulwich. From his bedroom window he could not actually see the trains, but always he could hear their shrieking and their clangor, and he looked almost with apprehension at <abbr>St.</abbr> Ursula in her high serene four-poster reposing tranquilly upon the white wall. Nothing except the trains could vex her sleep; for in this house was a perpetual silence. Even when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Cleghorne was vociferously arguing with her husband, the noise of her rage down in the basement among the quilts and coverlets never penetrated beyond the door at the head of the enclosing staircase, save in sounds of fury greatly minified. So silent was the house that had it not been for the variety of the smells, Michael might easily have supposed that it really was empty and that life here was indeed an illusion. The smells, however, of onions or hot blankets or machine-oil or tomcats or dirty bicycles proclaimed emphatically that a community shared these ascending mustard-colored walls, that human beings passed along the stale landings to frowst behind those finger-stained doors of salmon-pink. Sometimes, too, Michael emerging into the passage from his room would hear from dingy altitudes descend the noise of a door hurriedly slammed; and sometimes he would see go down the ulcerous steps in front of the house depressing women in black, or unshaven men with the debtor’s wary and furtive eye. The only lodgers who seemed to be permanent were Barnes and Carvel the Solutionist. Barnes on the strength of Michael’s allowance used to go up West, as he described it, every night. He used to assure Michael, when toward two o’clock of the next afternoon he extracted himself from bed, that he devoted himself with the greatest pertinacity to obtaining definite news of Lily Haden. The Solutionist occasionally visited Michael with a draggled piece of newspaper, and often he was visible in the garden attending to a couple of Belgian hares who lived in a packing-case marked Fragile among the nettles of the backyard.</p>
			<p>After he had spent a week or so in absorbing the atmosphere of Leppard Street, Michael felt it was time for him to move forth again at any rate into that underworld whose gaiety, however tawdry and feverish, would be welcome after this turbid backwater. There was here the danger of being drugged by the miasma that rose from this unreflecting surface. He felt inclined to renew his acquaintance with Daisy Palmer, and to hear from her the sequel to the affair of Dolly Wearne and Hungarian Dave. He found her card with the Guilford Street address and went over to Bloomsbury, hoping to find her in to tea. The landlady looked surprised when he inquired for Miss Palmer.</p>
			<p>“Oh, she’s been gone this fortnight,” the woman informed him. Michael asked where she was living now.</p>
			<p>“I don’t know, I’m sure,” said the landlady, and as she was already slowly and very unpleasantly closing the door, Michael came away a little disconsolate. These abrupt dematerializations of the underworld were really very difficult to grapple with. It gave him a sense of the futility of his search for Lily (though lately he had prosecuted it somewhat lazily) when girls, who a month ago offered what was presumably a permanent address, could have vanished completely a fortnight later. Perhaps Daisy would be at the Orange. He would take Barnes with him this evening and ask his opinion of her and Dolly and Hungarian Dave.</p>
			<p>The beerhall downstairs looked exactly the same as when he had visited it a month ago. Michael could sympathize with the affection such places roused in the hearts of their frequenters. There was a great deal to be said for an institution that could present, day in, day out, a steady aspect to a society whose life was spent in such extremes of elation and despair, of prosperity and wretchedness, and whose actual lodging was liable to be changed at any moment for better or worse.</p>
			<p>“Not a bad place, is it?” said Barnes, looking round in critical approval at the prostitutes and bullies hoarded round the tables puddly with the overflow of mineral waters and froth of beer.</p>
			<p>“You really like it?” Michael asked.</p>
			<p>“Oh, it’s cheerful,” said Barnes. “And that’s something nowadays.”</p>
			<p>Michael perceived Daisy before they were halfway across the room. He greeted her with particular friendliness as an individual among these hard-eyed constellations.</p>
			<p>“Hulloa!” she cried. “Wherever have you been all this time?”</p>
			<p>“I called at Guilford Street, but you were gone.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes. I left there. I couldn’t stand the woman there any longer. Sit down. Who’s your friend?”</p>
			<p>Michael brought Barnes into the conversation, and suggested moving into one of the alcoves where it was easier to talk.</p>
			<p>“No, come on, sit down here. Fritz won’t like it, if we move.”</p>
			<p>Michael looked round for the protector, and she laughed.</p>
			<p>“You silly thing! Fritz is the waiter.”</p>
			<p>Michael presently grew accustomed to being jogged in the back by everyone who passed, and so powerful was the personality of the Orange that very soon he, like the rest of the crowd, was able to discuss private affairs without paying any heed to the solitary smoking listeners around.</p>
			<p>“Where’s Dolly?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I had to get rid of her very sharp,” said Daisy. “She served me a very nasty trick after I’d been so good to her. Besides, I’ve taken up with a fellow. Bert Saunders. He does the boxing for <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Crime Illustrated</i>.”</p>
			<p>“You told me I was like him,” Michael reminded her.</p>
			<p>“That’s right. I remember now. I’m living down off Judd Street in a flat. Why don’t you come round and see me there?”</p>
			<p>“I will,” Michael promised.</p>
			<p>“Wasn’t Bert Saunders the fellow who was keeping Kitty Metcalfe?” asked Barnes.</p>
			<p>“That’s right. Only he gave her the push after she hit Maudie Clive over the head with a port-wine glass in the Half Moon upstairs.”</p>
			<p>“I knew Kitty,” said Barnes, shaking his head to imply that acquaintance with Kitty had involved a wider experience than fell to most men. “What’s happened to her?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Gard, don’t ask me,” said Daisy. “She’s got in with a fellow who kept a fried-fish place in the Caledonian Road, and I’ve never even seen her since.”</p>
			<p>“And what’s happened to Dolly?” asked Michael.</p>
			<p>“Oh, good job if that love-boy of hers does punch into her. Silly cow! She ought to know better. Fancy going off as soft as you like with that big-mouthed five-to-two, and after I’d just given her six of my new handkerchiefs.”</p>
			<p>Michael wished he could have an opportunity of explaining to Barnes that on account of Daisy’s friendship for Dolly, he and she and the cast-off had spent a night in the police-cells. He thought it would have amused him.</p>
			<p>“Where’s the Half Moon?” he asked instead.</p>
			<p>Daisy said it was a place in Glasshouse Street for which she had no very great affection. However, Michael was anxious to see it; and soon they left the Orange to visit the Half Moon.</p>
			<p>It was a public-house with nothing that was demirep in its exterior; but upstairs there was a room frequented after eleven o’clock by ladies of the town. They walked up a narrow twisting staircase carpeted with bright red felt and lit by a red-shaded lamp, and found themselves in a room even more densely fumed with tobacco smoke than downstairs at the Orange. In a corner was an electric organ which was fed with a stream of pennies and blared forth its repertory of ten tunes with maddening persistence. One of these tunes was gay enough to make the girls wish to dance, and always with its recurrence there was a certain amount of cake-walking which was immediately stopped by a commissionaire who stood in the doorway and shouted “Order, please! Quiet, please! No dancing, ladies!” To the nearest couple he always whispered that the police were outside.</p>
			<p>Daisy, having stigmatized the Half Moon as the rottenest hole within a mile of the Dilly, proceeded to become more cheerful with every penny dropped into the slot; and finally she invited Michael to come back with her to Judd Street, as her boy had gone down to Margate to see Young Sancy, a prospective lightweight champion, who was training there.</p>
			<p>“Anyway, you can see me home,” she said. “Even if you don’t come in. Besides, my flat’s all right. It is, really. You know. Comfortable. He’s very good to me, is Bert, though he’s a bit soppified. He dresses very nice, and he earns good money. Well, three pound a week. That’s not so bad, is it?”</p>
			<p>“That’s all right,” said Barnes. “With what you earn as well.”</p>
			<p>“There’s a nerve,” said Daisy. “Well, I can’t stay moping indoors all the evening, can I? But he’s most shocking jealous is Bert. And he calls me his pussycat. Puss, puss! There’s a scream. He’s really a bit soft, and his eyes is awful. But it’s nice, so here’s luck.” She drained her glass. “ ‘Do you love me, puss?’ he says. Silly thing! But they think a lot of him at the office. His governor came down to see him the other morning about something he’s been writing. I don’t know what it was. I hate the sight of his writing. I carry on at him something dreadful, and then he says, ‘My pussycat mustn’t disturb me.’ ”</p>
			<p>Daisy shrieked with laughter at the recollection, and Michael who was beginning to be rather fearful for her sobriety suggested home as a good move.</p>
			<p>“I shan’t go if you don’t come back with me,” she declared.</p>
			<p>Since their incarceration Michael had a tender feeling for Daisy, and he promised to accompany her. She would not go in a hansom, however; nor would she allow Barnes to make a third; and in the end she and Michael went wandering off down Shaftesbury Avenue through the warm September night.</p>
			<p>Michael enjoyed walking with her, for she rambled on with long tales of her past that seemed the inconsequent threads of a legendary Odyssey. He flattered himself with her companionship, and told himself that here at last was a demonstration of the possibility of a true friendship with a woman of that class with whom mere friendship would be more improbable than with any woman. It was really delightful to stroll with her homeward under this starlit sky of London; to wander on and on while she chattered forth her history. There had been no hint of any other relation between them; she was accepting him as a friend. He was proud as they walked through Russell Square, overshadowed by the benign trees that hung down with truculent green sprays in the lamplight; he felt a thrill in her companionship, as they dawdled along the railings of Brunswick Square in the acrid scent of the privet. It was curious to think that from the glitter and jangle of the Half Moon could rise this friendship that was giving to all the houses they passed a strange peacefulness. He fancied that here and there the windows were blinking at them in drowsy content, when the gas was extinguished by the unknown bedfarer within. Judd Street shone before them in a lane of lamps, and beyond, against the night, the gothic cliff of <abbr>St.</abbr> Pancras Station was indistinctly present. They turned down into Little Quondam Street, and presently came to a red brick house with a pretentious portico.</p>
			<p>“Our flat’s in here. Agnes House, it’s called. Come in and have one before you go home,” she invited.</p>
			<p>Michael entered willingly. He was glad to show so quickly his confidence in their new friendship.</p>
			<p>Agnes House was only entitled to the distinction of a name rather than a number, because the rest of the houses in Quondam Street were shabby, small, and old. It was a new building three stories high, and it was already falling to pieces, owing to work which must have been exceptionally dishonest to give so swiftly the effect of caducity. This collapse was more obvious because it was not dignified by the charm of age; and Agnes House in its premature dissolution was not much more admirable than a cardboard box which has been left out in the rain. Upon Michael it made an impression as of something positively corrupt in itself apart from any association with depravity: it was like a young person with a vile disease whose condition nauseated without arousing pity.</p>
			<p>“Rather nice, eh?” said Daisy, as she lit the gas in the kitchen of the flat. “Sit down. I’ll get some whisky. There’s a bathroom, you know. And it’s grand being on the ground floor. I should get the hump, if we was upstairs. I always swore I’d never live in a flat. Well, I don’t really call them safe, do you? Anything might happen and nothing ever be found out.”</p>
			<p>Michael as he saw the crude pink sheets of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Crime Illustrated</i> strewn about the room was not surprised that Daisy should often get nervous when left alone. These horrors in which fashion-plates with mangled throats lay weltering in pools of blood could scarcely conduce to a placid loneliness, and Michael knew that she probably spent a great deal of every day in solitude. Her life with <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Crime Illustrated</i> to fright her fancy must always be haunted by presentiments of dread at the sound of a key in the latch. It was curious, this half childlike existence of the underworld always upon the boundaries of fear. Michael could see the villainous paper used for every kind of domestic service⁠—to wrap up a piece of raw meat, to contain the scraps for the cat’s dinner, and spread half over the kitchen table as a cloth whereon the disks of grease lay like great thunder-drops. It would be very natural, when the eyes never rested from these views of sordid violence, to expect evil everywhere. Himself, as he sat here, was already half inclined to accept the underworld’s preoccupation with crime as a truer judgment of human nature than was held by a sentimental civilization, and he began to wonder whether a good deal of his own privacy had not been spent in a fool’s paradise of security. The moated grange and the dark tower were harmless rococo terrors beside the maleficent commonplace of Agnes House.</p>
			<p>“The kitchen’s in a rare old mess, isn’t it?” said Daisy looking round her. “It gives Bert the rats to see it like this.”</p>
			<p>“Are you fond of him?” Michael asked. He was anxious to display his friendly interest.</p>
			<p>“Oh, he’s all right. But I wouldn’t ever get fond of <em>any</em>body. It doesn’t pay with men. The more you give them, the more they think they can do as they like with you.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand why you live with him, if he’s nothing better than all right,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“Well, I’m used to him, and he’s not always in the way like some fellows are.”</p>
			<p>Michael would have liked to ask her about the beginning of her life as it was now conducted. Daisy was so essentially of the streets that it was impossible to suppose she had ever known a period of innocency. Her ancestry seemed to go back to the doxies of the eighteenth century, and beyond them to Alsatian queens, and yet farther to the tavern wenches of François Villon and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Chronique Scandaleuse</i>. There was nothing pathetic about her; he could not imagine her ever in a position to be wronged by a man. She was in very fact the gay woman who was bred first from some primordial heedlessness unchronicled. She would be a hard subject for chivalrous treatment, so deeply would she inevitably despise it. Nevertheless, he wanted to try to bring home to her the quality of the feeling she had inspired in him. He was anxious to prove to her the reality of a friendliness untainted by any thought of the relation in which she might justifiably think he would prefer to stand.</p>
			<p>“There’s something extraordinarily attractive about being friends,” he began. “Isn’t it a great relief for you to meet someone who wishes to be nothing more than a friend?”</p>
			<p>“Friends,” Daisy repeated. “I don’t know that I think much of friends. You don’t get much out of <em>them</em>, do you?”</p>
			<p>“Is that all anybody is for,” Michael asked in disappointment. “To get something out of?”</p>
			<p>“Well, naturally. Anyone can’t live on nothing, can they?”</p>
			<p>“But I don’t see why a friend shouldn’t be as profitable as an ephemeral⁠ ⁠… as a lover⁠ ⁠… well, what I mean is, as a man you meet at eleven and say goodbye to next morning. A friend could be quite as generous.”</p>
			<p>“I never knew anyone in this world give anything unless they wanted twice as much back in return,” said Daisy.</p>
			<p>“Why do you suppose I gave you money the other day and paid your fine in the police court?” he asked, for, though he did not like it, he was so anxious to persuade her of the feasibleness of friendship, that he could not help making the allusion.</p>
			<p>“I suppose you wanted to,” she said.</p>
			<p>“As a friend,” he persisted.</p>
			<p>“Oh, all right,” she agreed with him lazily. “Have it your own way. I’m too sleepy to argue.”</p>
			<p>“Then we are friends?” Michael asked gravely.</p>
			<p>“Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. A couple of old talk-you-deads joring over a clothesline. Get on with it, Roy⁠—or what’s your name? Michael, eh? That’s right.”</p>
			<p>“Good! Now, supposing I ask your advice, will you give it to me?”</p>
			<p>“Advice is very cheap,” said Daisy.</p>
			<p>“I used to know a girl,” Michael began.</p>
			<p>“A straight-cut?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes. Certainly. Oh, rather. At least in those days she was.”</p>
			<p>“I see. And now she’s got a naughty little twinkle in her eye.”</p>
			<p>“Look here. Do listen seriously,” Michael begged. “She isn’t a straight-cut any longer.”</p>
			<p>“Well, what did I tell you? That’s what I said. She’s gone gay.”</p>
			<p>“I want to get her away from this life,” Michael announced, with such solemnity that Daisy was insulted.</p>
			<p>“Why, what’s the matter with it? You’re as bad as a German ponce I knew who joined the Salvation Army. Don’t you try taking me home tonight to our loving heavenly father. It gives me the sick.”</p>
			<p>“But this girl was brought up differently. She was what is called a ‘lady.’ ”</p>
			<p>“More shame for her then,” said Daisy indignantly. “She ought to have known better.”</p>
			<p>It was curious this sense of intrusion which Lily’s fall gave to one so deeply plunged. There was in Daisy’s attitude something of the unionist’s toward foreign blackleg labor.</p>
			<p>“Well, you see,” Michael pointed out. “As even you have no pity for her, wouldn’t it be right for me to try to get her out of the life altogether?”</p>
			<p>“How are you going to do it? If she was walking about with a sunshade all day, before you sprang it on her.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“I had nothing to do with it,” Michael interrupted. “At least not directly.”</p>
			<p>“Well, what are you pulling your hair out over?” she demanded in surprise.</p>
			<p>“I feel a certain responsibility,” he explained. “Go on with what you were saying.”</p>
			<p>“If she left a nice home,” Daisy continued, “to live gay, she isn’t going to be whistled back to Virginia the same as you would a dog. Now, is she?”</p>
			<p>“But I want to marry her,” said Michael simply.</p>
			<p>Daisy stared at him in commiseration for his folly.</p>
			<p>“You must be worse than potty over her,” she gasped.</p>
			<p>“Why?”</p>
			<p>“Why? Why, because it doesn’t pay to marry that sort of girl. She’ll only do you down with some fancy fellow, and then you’ll wish you hadn’t been such a grass-eyes.”</p>
			<p>A blackbeetle ran quickly across the gaudy oilcloth, and Michael sitting in this scrofulous kitchen had a presentiment that Daisy was right. Sitting here, he was susceptible to the rottenness that was coeval with all creation. It called forth in him a sense of futility, so that he felt inclined to surrender his resolve to an universal pessimism. Yet in the same instant he was aware of the need for him to do something, even if his action were to carry within itself the potential destruction of more than he was setting out to accomplish.</p>
			<p>“When do you see her?” asked Daisy. “And what does <em>she</em> say about being married?”</p>
			<p>“Well, as a matter of fact, I haven’t seen her for nearly five years,” Michael explained rather apologetically. “I’m searching for her now. I’ve got to find her.”</p>
			<p>“Strike me, if you aren’t the funniest ⸻ I ever met,” Daisy exclaimed.</p>
			<p>She leaned back in her chair and began to laugh. Her mockery was for Michael intensified by the surroundings through which it was echoing. The kitchen was crowded with untidy accumulations, with half-washed plates and dishes, with odds and ends of attire; but the laughter seemed to be ringing through a desert. Perhaps the illusion of emptiness was due to the pictures nailed without frames to the walls of the room, whose eyes watched him with unnatural fixity; and yet so homely was the behavior of the people in the pictures that by contrast suddenly they made the kitchen seem unreal. Indeed, the whole house, no more substantial than a house in a puppet-show, betrayed its hollowness. It became an interior very much like those glimpses of interiors in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Crime Illustrated</i>. The slightest effort of fancy would have shown Daisy Palmer cloven by a hatchet, yet coquettish enough even in sanguinary death to display lisle-thread stockings and the scalloped edge of a white petticoat. There was nothing like this of which to dream in Leppard Street. Death would come as slowly and wearily thither as here he would enter sensationally.</p>
			<p>Daisy ceased to rock herself with mirth.</p>
			<p>“No, really,” she said. “It’s a shame to laugh, but you are the limit. Only you did ask my advice, and I tell you straight you’ll be sorry if you do marry her. What’s she like, Wandering Willie? Have some cocoa if I make it? Go on, do. I’ll boil it on the gas-ring.”</p>
			<p>Michael was touched by her attention, and he accepted the offer of cocoa. Then he began to describe Lily’s appearance. He could not, however much she might laugh, keep off the object of his quest. Lily was, after all, the only rational explanation of his present mode of life.</p>
			<p>“She sounds a bit washed out according to your description of her,” Daisy commented. “Still, everyone to their own fancy, and if you like blue-eyed bottles of peroxide, that’s your lookout.”</p>
			<p>They were drinking the cocoa she had made, and the flame of the gas-ring gave just the barren comfort that the kitchen seemed to demand. Another blackbeetle hurried over the oilcloth. A belated fly buzzed angrily against the shade of the electric light. Daisy yawned and looked up at the metal clock with its husky tick.</p>
			<p>Suddenly there was the sound of a latchkey in the outer door. She leaped up.</p>
			<p>“Gard, supposing that’s Bert come back from Margate!”</p>
			<p>She pushed Michael hurriedly across the passage into the front room, commanding him to keep quiet and stay in an empty curtained recess. Then she hurried back to the kitchen, leaving him in a very unpleasant frame of mind. He heard through the closed door Daisy’s voice in colloquy with a deeper voice. Evidently Bert had come back; but his return had been so abrupt that he had had no time to prevent himself being placed in this ridiculous position. Would he have to stay in this recess all night? He peered out into the room, which was in a filigree of bleak shadows made by the street lamp shining through the muslin curtains of the window. Through a desolation of undrawn blinds the houses of Little Quondam Street were visible across the road. The unused room smelt moldy, and if Michael had ever pictured himself in the complexity of a clandestine affair, this was not at all the romantic environment he would have chosen for his drama. This was really damned annoying, and he made a step in the direction of the kitchen to put an end to the misunderstanding. Surely Saunders would have realized that his visit to Daisy was harmless: and yet would he? How stupid she had been to hustle him out of the way like this. Naturally the fellow would be suspicious now. Would that hum of conversation never stop? It reminded him of the fly which had been buzzing round the lamp. Supposing Saunders came in here to fetch something? Was he to hide ignominiously behind this confounded curtain, and what on earth would happen if he were discovered? Michael boiled with rage at the prospect of such an indignity. Saunders would probably want to fight him. A man who spent his life helping to produce <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Crime Illustrated</i> was no doubt deep-dyed himself in the vulgar crudity of his material.</p>
			<p>Ten minutes passed. Still that maddening hum of talk rose and fell. Ten more minutes passed; and Michael began to estimate the difficulty of climbing out of the window into the street. It had been delightful, this experience, until he had entered this cursed flat. He should have parted from Daisy on the doorstep, and then he would have carried home with him the memory of a friendship that belonged to the London starlight. The whole relation had been ruined by entering this scabrous building.</p>
			<p>He must have been here for more than an hour. It was insufferable. He would go boldly into the kitchen and brave Saunders’ violence. Yet he could not do that because Daisy would be involved by such a step. What could they be talking about? It was really unreasonable for people who lived together to sit up chatting half the night. At last he heard the sound of an opening door; there were footsteps in the passage; another door-opened; after a minute or two somebody walked out into the street. Michael had just sighed with relief, when he heard footsteps coming back; and the buzz of conversation began again in a lighter timbre. This was simply intolerable. He was evidently going to stay here until the filigree of shadows faded in the dawn. Saunders must have brought in a friend with him. Another half hour passed and Michael had reached a stage of cynicism which disclaimed any belief in friendship. Not again would he so easily let himself be made ridiculous. Then he became conscious of a keen desire to see this Saunders whom, by the way, he was supposed to resemble. It was tantalizing to miss the opportunity of comparison.</p>
			<p>The hum of conversation stopped. Soon afterward Daisy came into the room and whispered that he could creep out now, but that he must not slam the front door. She would see him at the Orange tomorrow.</p>
			<p>When they reached the passage, she called back through the kitchen:</p>
			<p>“Bert, do you know you left the front door open?”</p>
			<p>Idiotically and uxoriously floated from the inner bedroom: “Did I, pussy cat? Puss must shut it then.”</p>
			<p>Daisy dug Michael violently in the ribs to express her inward hilarity; then suddenly she pulled him to her and kissed him roughly. In another second he was in the lamplight of Little Quondam Street. As in a nightmare it converged before him: a lean dog was routing in some garbage: a drunken man, reeling along the pavement opposite, abused him in queer disjointed obscenities without significance.</p>
			<p>Barnes was sitting in Michael’s room, when he got back to Leppard Street.</p>
			<p>“What ho,” he said sleepily. “You’ve been enjoying yourself with that piece, then?”</p>
			<p>Michael regarded him angrily.</p>
			<p>“What do you mean?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, chuck it, Fane. You needn’t look so solemn; she’s not a bad bit of goods, either. I’ve heard of her before.”</p>
			<p>Michael turned away from him. He knew it would be useless to try to convince Barnes that there was nothing between him and Daisy. Moreover, if he told the true tale of the evening, he would only make himself out utterly absurd. It was a pity that an evening which had promised such a reward for his theories should now be tainted. But when Barnes had slouched upstairs to bed, Michael realized how little his insinuations had mattered. The adventure had been primarily a comic experience; it had displayed him once more grotesquely reflected in the underworld’s distorting mirror.</p>
			<p>On the following night Michael went to the Café d’Orange, and heard Daisy’s account of the wonderful way in which she had fooled Bert Saunders.</p>
			<p>“But really, you know,” she said. “It did give me a turn. Fancy him coming back all of a sudden like that, and bringing in that fighting fellow. What a terrible thing, if Bert had found out you was in there and put him up to bashing your face. Oh, but Bert’s all right with his pussycat.”</p>
			<p>“But why didn’t you let me stay where I was?” Michael asked. “And introduce me quite calmly. He couldn’t have said anything.”</p>
			<p>“Couldn’t he?” Daisy cried. “I reckon he could then. I reckon he could have said a lot. If he hadn’t, I’d have given him the chuck right away. I don’t want no fellow hanging around me that hasn’t got the pluck to go for anyone he finds messing about with his girl. <em>Couldn’t</em> he have said anything?”</p>
			<p>Michael was again face to face with topsyturvydom. It really was time to meditate on the absurdity of trying to control these people of the underworld with laws and regulations and penalties which had been devised to control individuals who represented moral declension from the standards of a genteel civilization. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Murdoch, Poppy, Barnes, Daisy⁠—they all inverted the very fabric of society. They were moral antipodeans to the magistrate or the legislator or the social reformer. They were pursuing and acting up to their own ideals of conduct: they were not fleeing or falling away from a political morality. Was it possible, then, to say that evil was something more than a mere failure to conform to goodness? Was it possible to declare confidently the absolutism of evil? In this topsyturvydom might there not be perceived a great constructive force?</p>
			<p>Michael pondered these questions a good deal. He had not enough evidence as yet to provide him with a synthesis; but as he sat through the rapid darkening of the September dusks, it seemed to him that very often he was trembling upon the verge of a discovery. Leppard Street came to stand as a dark antechamber with massive curtains drawn against the light, the light which in the past he had only perceived through the chinks of impenetrable walls. Leppard Street was Dante’s obscure wood of the soul; it rustled with a thousand intimations of spiritual events. Leppard Street was dark, but Michael did not fear the gloom, because he knew that he was winning here with each new experience a small advance; at Oxford he had merely contemplated the result of the former pilgrimages of other people. With a quickening of his ambition he told himself that the light would be visible when he married Lily, that through her salvation he would save himself.</p>
			<p>Michael did not reenter his own world, whose confusion of minor problems would have destroyed completely his hope to stand unperplexed before the problems of the underworld, the solution of which might help to solve the universe or at any rate his own share in the universe. He did not tell his mother or Stella where he was living, and their letters came to him at his club. They did not worry him, although Stella threatened a terrible punishment if he did not appear in their midst in time to give her away in November. This he promised to do in spite of everything. He was faithful to his search for Lily, and he even went so far as to call upon Drake to ask if he had ever seen her since that night at the Orient. But he had not. Michael did not vex himself over the failure to discover Lily’s whereabauts. Having placed himself at the nod of destiny, he was content to believe that if he never found her he must be content to look elsewhere for the expression of himself. September became October. It would be six years this month since first they met, and she was twenty-two now. Could seventeen be captured anew?</p>
			<p>One afternoon from his window Michael was pondering the etiolated season whose ghostliness was more apparent in Leppard Street, because no fall of leaves marked material decline. Hurrying along the brindled walls from the direction of Greenarbor Court was a parson whose walk was perfectly familiar, though he could not affix it to any person he knew. Yes, he could. It was Chator’s, the dear, the pious and the bubbling Chator’s; and how absurdly the same as it used to be along the corridors of <abbr>St.</abbr> James’. Michael rushed out to meet him, and had seized and shaken his hand before Chator recognized him. When he did, however, he was twice as much excited as Michael, and spluttered forth a fountain of questions about his progress during these years with a great deal of information about his own. He came in eagerly at Michael’s invitation, and so much had he still to ask and tell that it was a long time before he wanted to know what had brought Michael to Leppard Street.</p>
			<p>“How extraordinary to find you here, my dear fellow! This isn’t my district, you know. But the Senior Curate is ill. Greenarbor Court! I say, what a dreadful slum!” Chator looked very intensely at Michael, as if he expected he would offer to raze it to the ground immediately. “I never realized we had anything quite so bad in the parish. But what really is extraordinary about running across you like this is that a man who’s just come to us from Ely was talking about you only yesterday. My goodness, how⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>“It’s no larger than a grain of sand,” Michael interrupted quickly.</p>
			<p>“What is?” asked Chator, with his familiar expression of perplexity at Michael.</p>
			<p>“You were going to comment on the size of the world, weren’t you?”</p>
			<p>“I suppose you’ll rag me just as much as ever, you old brute.” Chator was beaming with delight at the prospect. “But seriously, this man Stewart⁠—Nigel Stewart. I think he was at Trinity, Oxford. You do know him?”</p>
			<p>“Nigel isn’t here, too?” Michael exclaimed.</p>
			<p>“He’s our deacon.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, how priceless you’ll both be in the pulpit,” said Michael. “And tomorrow’s Sunday. Which of you will be preaching at Mass?”</p>
			<p>“My dear fellow, the Vicar always preaches at Mass. I shall be preaching at Evening Prayer. Why don’t you come to supper in the Clergy House afterward?”</p>
			<p>“How do you like your Vicar?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, very sound, very sound,” said Chator, shaking his head.</p>
			<p>“Does he take the ablutions at the right moment?” asked Michael, twinkling.</p>
			<p>“Oh, yes. Oh, yes. He’s very sound. Quite all right. I was afraid at first he was going to be a leetle High Church. But he’s not. Not a bit. We had a procession this June on Corpus Christi. The people liked it. And of course we’ve got the children.”</p>
			<p>They talked for an hour of old friends, of Viner, of Dom Cuthbert and Clere Abbey and schooldays, until at last Chator had to be going.</p>
			<p>“You will come on Sunday?”</p>
			<p>“Of course. But what’s the name of your church?”</p>
			<p>“My dear fellow, that shows you haven’t heard your parochial Mass,” said Chator, with mock seriousness. “<abbr>St.</abbr> Chad’s is our church.”</p>
			<p>“It sounds as if you had a saintly fish for Patron,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“I say, steady. Steady. <abbr>St.</abbr> Chad, you know, of Lichfield.”</p>
			<p>Michael laughed loudly.</p>
			<p>“My dear old Chator, you are just as inimitable as ever. You haven’t changed a bit. Well, Saint Chad’s⁠—Sunday.”</p>
			<p>From the window he watched Chator hurrying along beside the brindled walls. He thought how every excited step he took showed him to be bubbling over with the joy of telling Nigel Stewart of such a coincidence in the district of the Senior Curate.</p>
			<p>Michael suggested to Barnes that he should come with him to church on Sunday, and Barnes, who evidently thought his salary demanded deference to Michael’s wishes, made no objection. It was an October evening through which a wintry rawness had already penetrated, and the interior of <abbr>St.</abbr> Chad’s with its smell of people and warm wax and stale incense was significant of comfort and shelter. The church, a dreary Byzantine edifice, was nevertheless a very essential piece of London, being built of the yellow bricks whose texture and color more than that of any other material adapt themselves to the grime of the city. Nothing deliberately beautiful would have had power here. These people who sat thawing in a stupor of waiting felt at home. They were submerged in London streets, and their church was as deeply engulfed as themselves. The Stations of the Cross did not seem much more strange here than the lithographs in their own kitchens, and the raucous drone of Gregorians was familiar music.</p>
			<p>As the Office proceeded, Michael glanced from time to time toward his companion. At first Barnes had kept an expression of injured boredom, but with each chant he seemed less able to resist the habits of the past. Michael felt bound to ascribe to habit his compliance with the forms and ceremonies, for it was scarcely conceivable that he could any longer be moved by the appeal of a sensuous worship, still less by the craving of his soul for God.</p>
			<p>Chator’s discourse was a simple one delivered with all the spluttering simplicity he could bring to it. Michael was not sure of the effect upon the congregation, but himself found it moving in a gently pathetic way. The sermon had the naive obviousness and the sweet seriousness of a child telling a long tale of imaginary adventure. It was easy to see that Chator had never known from the moment of his Ordination, or indeed from the moment he began to suppose he was thinking for himself, a single doubt of the absolute truth of his religion, still less of its expediency. Michael wondered again what effect the sermon was having upon the congregation, which was sitting all round him woodenly in a sort of browse. Did one sentence reach it, or was the whole business of the sermon merely an excuse to sit here basking in the stuffiness of the homely church? Michael turned a sidelong look at Barnes. Tears were in his eyes, and he was staring into the gloom of the dingy apse with its tesselations of dull gold. This was disconcerting to Michael’s opinion of the sermon, for Chator could not be shaking Barnes by his eloquence: these splutterings of dogma were surely not able to rouse one so deep in the quagmire of his own corruption. Must he confess that a positive sanctity abode in this church? He would be glad to believe it did; he would be glad to imagine that an imperishable temple of truth was posited among these perishable streets.</p>
			<p>The sermon was over, and as the congregation rose to sing the hymn, Michael was aware, he could not have said how, that these people pouring forth this sacred jingle were all very weary. They had come here to rest from the fatigue of dullness, and in a moment now the chill vapors of the autumn night would wreathe themselves round their journey home. Sunday was a day of pause when the people of the city had leisure to sigh out their weariness: it was no shutting of theaters or shops that made it sad. This congregation was composed of weaklings fit for neither good nor evil, and every Sunday night they were gathered together for a little while in the smell of warm wax and incense. Now already they were trooping out into the frore evening; their footsteps would shuffle for a space over the dark pavements; a few would have pickled cabbage and cheese for supper, a few would not; such was life in this limbo between Hell and Heaven. Barnes, however, was not to be judged with the bulk of the congregation: another reason must be found for the influence of Evening Prayer or of Chator’s words upon him.</p>
			<p>“Did you like the sermon?” Michael asked in the porch.</p>
			<p>“I didn’t listen to a word of it,” said Barnes emphatically.</p>
			<p>“Oh, really? I thought you were interested. You seemed interested,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“I was thinking what a mug I’d been not to back The Clown for the Cesarewitch. I had the tip. You know, Fane, I’ll tell you what it is. I’m not used to money, and that’s a fact. I don’t know how to spend it. I’m afraid of it. So bang it all goes on drinks.”</p>
			<p>“I thought you enjoyed the service,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“Oh, I’m used to services. You know. On and off I’ve done a lot of churchifying, I have. It would take something more than that fellow preaching to curdle me up. I’ve gone through it. Religion, love, and measles; they’re all about the same. I don’t reckon anybody gets them more than once properly.”</p>
			<p>Michael told Barnes he was going on to supper at the Clergy House, and though he had intended to invite him to come as well, he was so much irritated by his unconscious deception that he let him go off, and went back into the empty church to wait for Chator and Nigel Stewart. What puzzled Michael most about Barnes was how himself had ever managed to be impressed by his unusual wickedness. As he beheld him nowadays, a mean and common little squirt of exceptional beastliness really, he was amazed to think that once he had endowed him with almost diabolical powers. He remembered to this day the gleam in Brother Aloysius’ blue eyes when he was gathering the blackberries by that hazel-coppice. Perhaps it had been the monkish habit, which by contrast with his expression had made him seem almost supernaturally evil; and yet when he met him again at Earl’s Court he had been kindled by those blue eyes. Henry Meats had been very much like Henry Barnes; but where was now that lambent flame in the eyes? He had looked at them many times lately, but they had always been cold and unintelligent as a doll’s.</p>
			<p>“I really must have been mad when I was young,” Michael said to himself. “And yet other people have preserved the influence they used to have over me. Other people haven’t changed. Why should he? I wonder whether it was always myself I saw in him: my own evil genius?”</p>
			<p>Chator came to fetch him while he was worrying over Barnes’ lapse into unimportance, and together they passed through the sacristy into the Clergy House.</p>
			<p>Nigel Stewart’s room, which they visited in the minutes before supper, had changed very little from his digs in the High. Ely had added a picture or two; that was all. Nor had Nigel changed, except that his clerical attire made him more seraphic than ever. While he and Michael chattered of Oxford friends, Chator stood with his back to the fire beaming at the reunion which he felt he had brought about: his biretta at a military angle gave him a look of knowing benevolence.</p>
			<p>The bell sounded for supper, and they went along corridors hung with Arundel prints and faded photographs of cathedrals, until they came to a brightly lit room where it seemed that quite twenty people were going to sit down at the trestle-table. Michael was introduced to the Vicar and two more curates, and also to a dozen church workers who made the same sort of jokes about whatever dish they were helping. Also he met that walrus-like man who, whether as organist or ceremonarius or treasurer of club accounts or vicar’s churchwarden, is always to be found attached to the clergy. Michael sat next to him, as it happened, and found he had a deep voice and was unable to get nearer to <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">th</i> than <i epub:type="z3998:phoneme">v</i>.</p>
			<p>“We’re raver finking,” he confided to Michael over a high-heaped plate, “of starting Benediction, vis year.”</p>
			<p>“That will be wonderful,” said Michael politely.</p>
			<p>“Yes, it ought to annoy ver poor old Bishop raver.”</p>
			<p>The walrus-like man chuckled and bent over his food with a relish stimulated by such a prospect. After supper the two curates carried off their favorites upstairs to their own rooms; and as Chator, Stewart, and Michael were determined to spend the evening together, the Vicar was left with rather more people than usual to smoke his cigarettes.</p>
			<p>“I envy you people,” said Michael, as the three of them sank down into deep wicker chairs. “I envy this power you have to bring Oxford⁠—or Cambridge⁠—into London. For it is the same spirit in terms of action, isn’t it? And you’re free from the thought which must often worry dons that perhaps they are having a very good time without doing very much to deserve it.”</p>
			<p>“We work hard in this parish,” spluttered Chator. “Oh, rather. Very hard.”</p>
			<p>“That’s what I say. You have the true peace that thrives on activity,” said Michael. “But at the same time, what I’m rather anxious to know is how nearly you touch the real sinners.”</p>
			<p>Stewart and Chator looked at one another across his chair.</p>
			<p>“How much do we, brother?” asked Stewart.</p>
			<p>“No, really,” protested Michael. “My dear Nigel, I can’t have you being so affected. Brother! You must give up being archaic now that you’re a pale young curate.”</p>
			<p>“What do you call the real sinners?” asked Chator. “You saw our congregation tonight. All poor, of course.”</p>
			<p>“Shall I say frankly what I think?” Michael asked.</p>
			<p>The other two nodded.</p>
			<p>“I’m not sure if that congregation is worth a very great deal. I’m not trying to be offensive, so listen to me patiently. That congregation would come whatever you did. They came not because they wanted to worship God or because they desired the forgiveness of their sins, nor even because they think that going to church is a good habit. No, they came in a sort of sad drift of aimlessness; they came in out of the dreariness of their lives to sit for a little while in the glow that a church like yours can always provide. They went out again with a vague memory of comfort, material comfort, I mean; but they took away with them nothing that would kindle a flame to light up the gray weekdays. Do you know, I fancy that when these picture-theaters become more common, as they will, most of your people will get from them just the same sensation of warmth and material comfort. Obviously if this is a true observation on my part, your people regard church from a merely negative attitude. That isn’t enough, as you’ll admit.”</p>
			<p>“But it’s not fair to judge by the evening congregation,” Chator burst out. “You must remember that we get quite a different crowd at Mass.”</p>
			<p>“But do you get the real sinners?” Michael repeated.</p>
			<p>“My dear Michael, what does this inquisition forebode?” said Stewart. “You’re becoming wrapped in mystery. You’re found in Leppard Street for no reason that I’ve yet heard. And now you attack us in this unkind way.”</p>
			<p>“I’m not attacking you,” Michael said. “I’m trying to extract from you a point of view. Lately it happens that I’ve found myself in the company of a certain class, well⁠—the company of bullies and prostitutes. You must have lots of them in this parish. Do you get hold of them? I don’t believe you do, because the chief thing which has struck me is the utter remoteness of the Church or indeed of any kind of religion from the life of that class. And their standards are upside-down⁠—actually upside-down. They’re handed over entirely to the powers of darkness. Now, as far as I can see, the Devil⁠—or whatever you choose to call him⁠—only cares about people who are worth his while. He hands the others over to anybody that likes to deal with them. Equally I would say that God is a little contemptuous of the poor intermediates. The Church, however, in these hard times for religion is glad to get hold even of them, and this miserable spirit of mediocrity runs through the whole organization. The bishops are moderate; the successful parsons are moderate; and the flock is moderate. To come back to the sinners. You know, they <em>would</em> be worth getting. You’ve no idea what a force they would raise. And now, all their industry, all their ingenuity, all their vitality is devoted to the service of evil.”</p>
			<p>Chator could contain himself no longer.</p>
			<p>“My dear fellow, you don’t understand how impossible it is to get in touch with the people you’re talking about. They elude one. Of course, we should rejoice to get them. But they’re impossible.”</p>
			<p>“Christ moved among sinners,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“It’s not because we don’t long to move among them,” Chator spluttered in exasperation. “We would give anything to move among them. But we can’t. I don’t know why. But they won’t relax any of their barriers. They’re notoriously difficult.”</p>
			<p>“Then it all comes down to a ‘no’ in answer to my question,” said Michael. “You don’t get the real sinners. That’s what’s the matter with <abbr>St.</abbr> Chad’s⁠—until you can compel the sinner to come in, you’ll stay in a spiritual backwater.”</p>
			<p>“If you were a priest,” said Chator, “you’d realize our handicap better.”</p>
			<p>“No doubt,” Michael agreed. “But don’t forget that the Salvation Army gets hold of sinners. In fact, I’ll wager that nine out of ten of the people with whom I’ve been in contact lately would only understand by religion the Salvation Army. Personally I loathe the Salvation Army. I think it is almost a more disruptive organization than anything else in the world. But at least it is alive; it’s not suet like most of the Dissenting Sects or a rather rich and heavy plum-pudding like the greater part of the Church of England. It’s a maddening and atrociously bad and cheap alcohol, but it does enflame. I tell you, my dear old Chator and my dear old Nigel, you have the greatest opportunity imaginable for energy, for living and bringing life to others, if only you’ll not sit down and be content because you’ve got the children and can fill the church for Evening Prayer with that colorless, dreary, dreadfully sorrowful crowd I saw tonight.”</p>
			<p>Michael leaned back in his chair; the fire crackled above the silence; and, outside, the disheartened quiet of the Sabbath was brooding. Chator was the first to speak.</p>
			<p>“Some of what you say may be true, but the rest of it is a mere muddle of heresies and misconceptions and misstatements. It’s absolute blasphemy to say that God is contemptuous of what you called the intermediates, and you apparently believe that evil is only misdirected good. You apparently think that your harlots and bullies are better for being more actively harmful.”</p>
			<p>“No, no,” Michael corrected. “You didn’t follow my argument. As a matter of fact, I believe in the absolutism of evil the more, the more I see of evil men and women. What I meant was that in proportion to the harm they have power to effect would be the inspiration and advantage of turning their abilities toward good. But cut out all theological questions and confess that the Church has failed with the class I speak of.”</p>
			<p>The argument swayed backward and forward for a long time, without reaching a conclusion.</p>
			<p>“You can’t have friars nowadays,” said Chator in response to Michael’s last expression of ambition. “Conditions have changed.”</p>
			<p>“Conditions had changed when <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis of Assisi tried to revive an absolute Christianity,” Michael pointed out. “Conditions had changed when the Incarnation took place. Pontius Pilate, Caiaphas, Judas, and a host of contemporaries must have tried to point that out. Materialists are always peculiarly sensitive to the change of external conditions. Do you believe in Christ?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t try to be objectionable, my dear fellow,” said Chator, getting very red.</p>
			<p>“Well, if you do,” persisted Michael, “if you accept the Gospels, it is utterly absurd for you as a Christian priest to make ‘change of conditions’ an excuse for having failed to rescue the sinners of your parish.”</p>
			<p>“Michael,” said Stewart, intervening on account of Chator’s obviously rising anger. “Why are you living in Leppard Street? What fiery mission are you upon? I believe you’re getting too much wrapped up in private fads and fancies. Why don’t you come and work for us at <abbr>St.</abbr> Chad’s?”</p>
			<p>“He’s one of those clever people who can always criticize with intense fervor,” said Chator bitterly. He was still very red and ruffled, and Michael felt rather penitent.</p>
			<p>“I wish I <em>could</em> work here. Chator, do forgive me for being so offensive. I really have no right to criticize, because my own vice is inability to do anything in company with other people. The very sight of workers in cooperation freezes me into apathy. If I were a priest, I should probably feel like you that the children were the most important. Have neither of you ever heard of anybody whose faith was confirmed by the realization of evil? Usually, it’s the other way about, isn’t it? I’ve met many unbelievers who first began to doubt, because the problem of evil upset their notions of divine efficiency. Chator, you have forgiven me, haven’t you?”</p>
			<p>“I ought to have realized that you didn’t mean half you were saying,” said Chator.</p>
			<p>Michael smiled. Should he start the argument again by insisting that he had meant even twice as much as he had said? In the end, however, he let Chator believe in his exaggeration, and they parted good friends.</p>
			<p>Nigel Stewart came often to see him during the next fortnight, and he was very anxious to find out why Michael was living in Leppard Street. Michael would not tell him, however, but instead he introduced him to Barnes who with money in his pocket was very independent and gave up sign of his boasted ability to circumvent parsons financially. No doubt, however, when he was thrown back on his own resources, he would benefit greatly by this acquaintance. Stewart had a theory that Michael had shut himself in Leppard Street to test the personality of Satan, and he used to insist that Michael performed all kinds of magical experiments in his solitude there. Having himself been a Satanist on several occasions at Oxford, he felt less than Chator would have done the daring of discussing Baudelaire and Huysmans. Deacon though he was, Nigel was still an undergraduate, nor did it seem probable that he would ever cease to be one. He tried to thrill Michael with some of his own diabolic experiences, but Michael was a little contemptuous and told him that his devil was merely a figure of academic naughtiness.</p>
			<p>“All that kind of subjective wickedness is nothing at all,” said Michael. “At the worst, it can only unbalance your judgment. I passed through it at the age of sixteen.”</p>
			<p>“You must have been horribly precocious,” said Nigel disapprovingly.</p>
			<p>“Oh, not more so than anyone who has freedom to develop. I should give up subjective encounters with evil, if I were you. You’ll be telling me soon that you’ve been pinched by demons like an Egyptian eremite.”</p>
			<p>Nigel gave the impression of rather deploring the lack of such an experience, and Michael laughed:</p>
			<p>“Go and see Maurice Avery in Grosvenor Road. He’s just the person you ought to convert. Nothing could be easier than to turn Mossy into an aesthetic Christian. Would that satisfy your zeal?”</p>
			<p>“I really think you <em>are</em> growing very offensive,” said Nigel.</p>
			<p>“No, I’m not. I’m illustrating a point. Your encounters with evil and Maurice’s encounters with religion would match each other. Both would have a very wide, but also a very superficial area.”</p>
			<p>November had arrived, and Michael reappeared in Cheyne Walk to assist at Stella’s wedding. He paid no attention to the scorn she flung at his affected mode of life, and he successfully resisted her most carefully planned sallies of curiosity:</p>
			<p>“What you have to do at present is to keep your own head, not mine. Think of the responsibilities of marriage and let me alone. I’ll tell you quite enough when the moment comes for telling.”</p>
			<p>“Michael, you’re getting dreadfully obstinate,” Stella declared. “I remember when I could get a secret out of you in no time.”</p>
			<p>“It’s not I who am obstinate,” said Michael. “It’s you who are utterly spoiled by the lovelorn Alan.”</p>
			<p>Michael and Alan went for a long walk in Richmond Park on the day before the wedding. It was a limpid day at the shutting-in of <abbr>St.</abbr> Martin’s summer, and to Michael it seemed like the ghost of one of those June Saturdays of eight years ago. Time had faded that warmer blue to a wintry turquoise, but there was enough of summer’s image in this wraith of a day to render very poignantly to him the past. He wondered if Alan were thinking of the afternoons when they had sent the sun down from Richmond Hill. That evening before the examinations of a summer term recurred to him now more insistently than any of those dead days.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Thick as autumnal leaves that strew the brooks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Vallombrosa.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Now the leaves were lying brown and dewy in the Richmond thickets. Then it was a summer evening of foliage in the prime. He wished he could remember the lines of Virgil which had matched the Milton. He used to know them so well:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
				<p>
					<span>Matres atque viri defunctaque corpora vita</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Magnanimum heroum, pueri innuptæque puellæ.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>There were two complex hexameters, but all that remained in his memory of the rest were two or three disjointed phrases:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
				<p>
					<span>Lapsa cadunt folia⁠ ⁠… ubi frigidus annus⁠ ⁠… et⁠ ⁠… terris apricis.</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Even at fourteen he had been able to respond to the melancholy of these lines; really, he had been rather an extraordinary boy. The sensation of other times which was evoked by walking like this in Richmond Park would soon be too strong for him any longer not to speak of it. Yet because those dead summer days seemed now to belong to the mystery of youth, to the still unexpressed and inviolate heart of a period that was forever overpast, Michael could not bring himself to destroy their sanctity with sentimental reminiscence. However, there had been comedy and absurdity also, perhaps rather more fit for exhumation now than those deeper moments.</p>
			<p>“Do you remember the wedding of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ross?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Rather,” said Alan, and they both smiled.</p>
			<p>“Do you remember when you first called her Aunt Maud, and we both burst out laughing and had to rush out of the room?”</p>
			<p>“Rather,” said Alan. “Boys <em>are</em> ridiculous, aren’t they?”</p>
			<p>“Supposing we both laugh like that when Stella is first called <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Merivale?” Michael queried.</p>
			<p>“I shall be in much too much of a self-conscious funk to laugh at anything,” said Alan.</p>
			<p>“And yet do you realize that we’re only talking of eight years ago? Nothing at all really. Six years less than we had already lived at the time when that wedding took place.”</p>
			<p>To Alan upon the verge of the most important action of his life Michael’s calculation seemed very profound indeed, and they both walked on in silence, meditating upon the revelation it afforded of a fugitive mortality.</p>
			<p>“You’ll be writing epitaphs next,” said Alan, in rather an aggrieved voice. He had evidently traversed the swift years of the future during the silence.</p>
			<p>“At any rate,” Michael said. “You can congratulate yourself upon not having wasted time.”</p>
			<p>“My god,” cried Alan, stopping suddenly. “I believe I’m the luckiest man alive.”</p>
			<p>“I thought you’d found a sovereign,” said Michael. He had never heard Alan come so near to emotional expression and, knowing that a moment later Alan would be blushing at his want of reserve, he loyally covered up with a joke the confusion that must ensue.</p>
			<p>Very few people came to the wedding, for Stella had insisted that as none of her girl friends were reputable enough to be bridesmaids, she must do without them. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ross came, however, and she brought with her Kenneth to be a solemn and freckled and carroty page. She was very anxious that Michael should come back after the wedding to Cobble Place, but he said he would rather wait until after Christmas. Nancy came, and Michael tried to remember if he had once seriously contemplated marrying her. How well he remembered her in short skirts, and here she was a woman of thirty with a brusque jolly manner and gold pince-nez.</p>
			<p>“You <em>are</em> a brute always to avoid my visits at Cobble Place,” grumbled Nancy. “Do you realize we haven’t met for years?”</p>
			<p>“You’re such a woman of affairs,” said Michael.</p>
			<p>“Well, do let’s try to meet next time. I say, don’t you think Maud looks terribly ill since she became a Romanist?”</p>
			<p>Michael looked across to where <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Ross was standing.</p>
			<p>“I think she’s looking rather well.”</p>
			<p>“Absolute destruction of individuality, you know,” said Nancy, shaking her head. “I was awfully sick about that business. However, I must admit that she hasn’t forced her religion down our throats.”</p>
			<p>“Did you expect an auto-da-fé in the middle of the lawn?” he asked. She thumped him on the shoulder:</p>
			<p>“Silly ass! Don’t you try to rag me.”</p>
			<p>They had a jolly talk, but Michael was glad he had not married her at eight years old. He decided that by now he would probably have regretted the step.</p>
			<p>Michael managed to get two or three minutes alone with Stella after the ceremony.</p>
			<p>“Well, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Prescott-Merivale?”</p>
			<p>“You’ve admitted I’m a married woman,” she exclaimed. “Now surely you can tell me what you’ve been doing since August and where you’ve been.”</p>
			<p>“I thought very fondly that you were without the curiosity of every woman,” said Michael. “Alas, you are not!”</p>
			<p>“Michael, you’re perfectly horrid to me.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t be too much the young wife,” he advised, with mocking earnestness.</p>
			<p>“I won’t listen to anything you say, until I know where you’ve been. Of course, if I hadn’t been so busy, I could easily have found you out.”</p>
			<p>“Not even can you sting me into the revelation of my hiding-place,” Michael laughed.</p>
			<p>“You shan’t stay with us at Hardingham unless you tell me.”</p>
			<p>“By the time you come back from your honeymoon, I may have wonderful news,” said Michael. “Oh, and by the way, where are you going for your honeymoon? It sounds absurd to ask such a question at this hour, but I’ve never heard.”</p>
			<p>“We’re going to Compiègne,” said Stella. “I wrote to little Castéra-Verduzan, and he’s lent us the cottage where you and I stayed.”</p>
			<p>That choice of Stella’s seemed to mark more decisively than anything she had said or done his own second place in her thoughts nowadays.</p>
			<p>When the bride and bridegroom were gone, Michael sat with his mother, talking.</p>
			<p>“I had arranged to go to the South of France with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Carruthers,” she told him. “But if you’re going to be here, I could put her off.”</p>
			<p>Michael felt rather guilty. He had not considered his mother’s loneliness, and he had meant to return at once to Leppard Street.</p>
			<p>“No, no, I’m going away again,” he told her.</p>
			<p>“Just as you like, dearest boy.”</p>
			<p>“You’re glad about Stella?”</p>
			<p>“Very glad.”</p>
			<p>“And you like Alan?”</p>
			<p>“Of course. Charming⁠—charming.”</p>
			<p>The firelight danced in opals on the windowpanes, and the macaw who had been brought up to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fane’s sitting-room out of the way of the wedding guests sharpened his beak on the perch.</p>
			<p>“It’s really quite chilly this afternoon,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fane.</p>
			<p>“Yes, there’s a good deal of mist along the river,” said Michael. “A pity that the fine weather should have broken up. It may be rather dreary in the forest.”</p>
			<p>“Why did they go to a forest?” she asked. “So like Stella to choose a forest in November. Most unpractical. Still, when one is young and in love, one doesn’t notice the mud.”</p>
			<p>Next day <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Fane went off to the South of France, and Michael went back to Leppard Street.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
