<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 11: Action and Reaction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">
					<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>
					<span epub:type="subtitle">Action and Reaction</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Almost before the confusion of a new term had subsided, Michael put his name down to play football again, and it was something in the nature of an occasion when in the first sweltering Middle-side game he scored six tries. Already his contemporaries had forgotten that he was once a fleet and promising three-quarter, so that his resurrection was regarded as an authentic apparition, startling in its unexpectedness. Michael was the only person not much surprised when he was invited by Abercrombie to play as substitute for one of the Seniors absent from a Big-side trial. Yet even Michael was surprised when in the opening match between Classics and Moderns he read his name on the notice-board as sixteenth man; and when, through the continued illness of the first choice, he actually found himself walking on to the field between the black lines of spectators, he was greatly content. Yet the finest thrill of all came when in the line-out he found himself on the left wing with Alan, with Alan not very unlike the old Alan even now in the coveted Tyrian vest of the Classical First Fifteen.</p>
				<p>Into that game Michael poured all he felt of savage detestation for everything that the Modern side stood for. Not an opponent was collared that did not in his falling agony take on the likeness of Percy Garrod; not a Modern halfback was hurled into touch who was not in Michael’s imagination insolent with damnably destructive theories of life. It was exhilarating, it was superb, it was ineffable, the joy of seeing Alan hand off a Modern bounder and swing the ball out low to him crouching vigilant upon the left. It was intoxicating, it was divine to catch the ball, and with zigzag leap and plunge to tear wildly on towards the Modern goal, to hear the Classical lower boys shriek their high-voiced thrilling exhortations, to hear the maledictions of the enemy ricochetting from a force of speed that spun its own stability. Back went the ball to Alan, shouting with flushed face on his right, just as one of the Modern three-quarters, with iron grip round Michael’s faltering knees, fetched him crashing down.</p>
				<p>“Good pass,” cried the delighted Classical boys, and “Well run, sir, well run, sir!” they roared as Alan whizzed the ball along to the dapper, the elusive, the incomparable Terry. “Go in, yourself,” they prayed, as Terry like a chamois bounded straight at the despairing fullback, then with a gasp that triumphed over the vibrant hush, checked himself, and in one peerless spring breasted the shoulders of the back to come thudding down upon the turf with a glorious try.</p>
				<p>Now the game swayed desperately, and with Alan ever beside him Michael lived through every heroic fight of man. They were at Thermopylae, stemming the Persian charges with hack and thrust and sweeping cut; they were at Platea with Aristides and Pausanias, vowing death rather than subjugation; the body of Terry beneath a weight of Modern forwards, crying, “Let me up, you stinkers!” was fought for as long ago beneath the walls of Troy the battle raged about the body of Patroclus. And when the game was over, when the Moderns had been defeated for the first time in four resentful years of scientific domination, when the Classical Fifteen proudly strode from the field, immortal in muddied Tyrian, it was easy enough to walk across the gravel arm-in-arm with Alan and, while still the noise of the contest and the cries of the onlookers echoed in their ears, it was easy to span the icy floes of two drifting years in one moment of careless, artless intercourse.</p>
				<p>“You’ll get your Second Fifteen colours,” said Alan confidently.</p>
				<p>“Not this year,” Michael thought.</p>
				<p>“You’ll get your Third Fifteen cap for a snip.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I ought to get that,” Michael agreed.</p>
				<p>“Well, that’s damned good, considering you haven’t played for two years,” Alan vowed.</p>
				<p>And as he spoke Michael wondered if Alan had ever wished for his company in the many stressful games from which he had been absent.</p>
				<p>Michael now became one of that group of happy immortals in the entrance-hall, whose attitudes of noble ease graced the hot-water pipes below the “board” on which the news of the school fluctuated daily. This society, to which nothing gave admission but a profound sense of one’s own right to enter it, varied from time to time only in details. As a whole composition it was immutable, as permanent, as decorative and as appropriate as the frieze of the Parthenon. From twenty minutes past nine until twenty-seven minutes past nine, from twenty-five minutes past eleven until twenty-eight minutes past eleven, from ten minutes to three until two minutes to three the heroes of the school met in a large familiarity whose Olympian laughter awed the fearful small boy that flitted uneasily past and chilled the slouching senior that rashly paused to examine the notices in assertion of an unearned right. Even masters entering through the swinging doors seemed glad to pass beyond the range of the heroes’ patronizing contemplation.</p>
				<p>Michael found a pedestal here, and soon idealized the heedless stupidity of these immortals into a Lacedemonian rigour which seemed to him very fine. He accepted their unimaginative standards, their coarseness, their brutality as virtues, and in them he saw the consummation of all that England should cherish. He successfully destroyed a legend that he was clever, and though at first he found it difficult to combat the suspicion of aesthetic proclivities and religious eccentricity, even of poetic ambitions which overshadowed his first welcome, he was at last able to get these condoned as a blemish upon an otherwise diverting personality with a tongue nimble enough to make heroes guffaw. Moreover, he was a friend of Alan, who with his slim disdain and perfectly stoic bearing was irreproachable, and since Michael frankly admired his new friends, and since he imparted just enough fantasy to their stolid fellowship to lend it a faint distinction, he was very soon allowed to preserve a flavour of oddity, and became in time arbiter of whatever elegance they could claim. Michael on his side was most anxious to conform to every prejudice of the Olympians, esteeming their stolidity far above his own natural demeanour, envious too of their profoundly ordinary point of view and their commonplace expression of it.</p>
				<p>Upon this assembly descended the news of war with the Transvaal, and for three months at least Michael shared in the febrile elation and arrogance and complacent outlook of the average Englishman. The Olympians recalled from early schooldays the forms of heroes who were even now gazetted to regiments on their way to the front, and who but a little while ago had lounged against these very hot-water pipes. Sandhurst and Woolwich candidates lamented their ill-luck in being born too young, and consoled themselves with proclaiming that after all the war was so easy that scarcely were they missing anything at all. Then came the first low rumble of defeat, the first tremulous breath of doubt.</p>
				<p>Word went round that meetings were being held to stop the war, and wrathfully the heroes mounted a London Road Car omnibus, snatched the Union Jack from its socket, and surged into Hammersmith Town Hall to yell and hoot at the farouche Irishmen and dirty Socialists who were mouthing their hatred of the war and exulting in the unlucky capture of two regiments. The School Cadet Corps could not accept the mass of recruits that demanded to be enrolled. Drums were bought by subscription, and in the armoury down under the School tattoo and rataplan voiced the martial spirit of <abbr>St.</abbr> James’.</p>
				<p>One day Alan brought back the news that his Uncle Kenneth was ordered to the front, that he would sail from Southampton in a few days. Leave was granted Alan to go and say goodbye, and in the patriotic fervour that now burned even in the hearts of schoolmasters, Michael was accorded leave to accompany him.</p>
				<p>They travelled down to Southampton on a wet, windy November day, proud to think as they sat opposite one another in the gloomy railway-carriage that in some way since this summons they were both more intimately connected with the war.</p>
				<p>In a dreary Southampton hotel they met <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross, and Michael thought that she was very beautiful and very brave waiting in the chilly flyblown dining-room of the hotel. Three years of marriage scarcely seemed to have altered his dear Miss Carthew; yet there was a dignity, a carven stillness that Michael had never associated with the figure of his governess, or perhaps it was that now he was older, more capable of appreciating the noble lines of this woman.</p>
				<p>It gave Michael a sentimental pang to watch <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross presiding over their lunch as she had in the past presided over so many lunches. They spoke hardly at all of Captain Ross’s departure, but they talked of Nancy, and how well she was doing as secretary to Lord Perham, of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Carthew, still among the roses and plums of Cobble Place, and of a hundred jolly bygone events. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross was greatly interested to hear of Stella, and greatly amused by Michael’s arrangement of her future.</p>
				<p>Then Captain Ross came in, and after a few jokes, which fell very flat in the bleak dining-room⁠—perhaps because the two boys were in awe of this soldier going away to the wars, or perhaps because they knew that there was indeed nothing to joke about⁠—said:</p>
				<p>“The regiment comes in by the 2:45. We shall embark at once. What’s the time now?”</p>
				<p>Everyone, even the mournful waiter, stared up at the wall. It was two o’clock.</p>
				<p>“Half an hour before I need go down to the station,” said Captain Ross, and then he began to whistle very quietly. The wind was getting more boisterous, and the rain rattled on the windows as if, without, a menacing hand flung gravel for a signal.</p>
				<p>“Can you two boys amuse yourselves for a little while?” asked Captain Ross.</p>
				<p>“Oh, rather,” said Michael and Alan.</p>
				<p>“I’ve just one or two things I wanted to say to you, dear,” said Captain Ross, turning to his wife. They left the dining-room together. Michael and Alan sat silently at the table, crumbling bread and making patterns in the saltcellar. They could hear the gaunt clock ticking away on the stained wall above them. From time to time far-off bugles sounded above the tossing wind. So they sat for twenty solemn minutes. Then the husband and wife came back. The bill was paid; the door of the hotel swung back; the porter said “Good luck, sir,” very solemnly, and in a minute they were walking down the street towards the railway-station through the wind and rain.</p>
				<p>“I’ll see you on the dock in a moment,” said Captain Ross. “You’d better take a cab down and wait under cover.”</p>
				<p>Thence onwards for an hour or more all was noise, excitement and bustle in contrast to the brooding, ominous calm of the dingy hotel. Regiments were marching down to the docks; bands were playing; there were drums and bugles, shouts of command, clatter of horses, the occasional rumble of a gun-carriage, enquiries, the sobbing of children and women, oaths, the hooting of sirens, a steam-engine’s whistle, and at last, above everything else, was heard the wail of approaching pipes.</p>
				<p>Nearer and nearer swirled the maddening, gladdening, heartrending tune they played; the Kintail Highlanders were coming; they swung into view; they halted, company after company of them; there were shouts of command very close; suddenly Michael found his hand clenched and saw Captain Ross’s grey eyes smiling goodbye; Alan’s sleeve seemed to have a loose thread that wanted biting off; the sirens of the great transport trumpeted angrily and, resounding through the sinking hearts of those who were not going, robbed them of whatever pluck was left. Everywhere in view sister, mother, and wife were held for a moment by those they loved. The last man was aboard; the gangway was hauled up; the screw pounded the water; the ship began to glide away from the dock with slow, sickening inevitableness. Upon the air danced handkerchiefs, feeble fluttering envoys of the passionate farewells they flung to the wind. Spellbound, intolerably powerless, the watchers on shore waved and waved; smaller grew the faces leaning over the rail; smaller and smaller, until at last they were unrecognizable to those left behind; and now the handkerchiefs were waved in a new fever of energy as if with the fading of the faces there had fallen upon the assembly a fresh communal grief, a grief that, no longer regarding personal heartbreaks, frantically pursued the great graceful ship herself whose prow was straining for the open sea. Still, though now scarcely even were human forms discernible upon the decks, the handkerchiefs jigged on for horribly mechanic gestures, as if those who waved them were become automatons through sorrow.</p>
				<p>Glad of the musty peace of a railway-carriage after the tears and confusion of the docks, Michael and Alan and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross spoke very little on the journey back to London.</p>
				<p>“Aren’t you going to stay the night with us at Richmond?” Alan asked.</p>
				<p>“No, I must get down to Cobble Place. My large son has already gone there with his nurse.”</p>
				<p>“Your son?” exclaimed Michael. “Oh, of course, I forgot.”</p>
				<p>So Alan and he put <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross into her train and rode back together on an omnibus, proud citizens of an Empire whose inspiration they had lately beheld in action.</p>
				<p>Next morning the Olympians on their frieze were considerably impressed by Michael’s account of the stirring scene at Southampton.</p>
				<p>“Oh, the war will be over almost at once. We’re not taking any risks. We’re sending out enough men to conquer more than the Transvaal,” said the heroes wisely.</p>
				<p>But soon there came the news of fresh defeats, and when in the middle of January school reassembled there were actually figures missing from the familiar composition itself. Actually contemporary heroes had left, had enlisted in the Volunteers and Yeomanry, were even now waiting for orders and meantime self-consciously wandering round the school-grounds in militant khaki. Sandhurst and Woolwich candidates passed with incredible ease; boys were coming to school in mourning; Old Jacobeans died bravely, and their deaths were recorded in the school magazine; one Old Jacobean gained the Victoria Cross, and everyone walked from prayers very proudly upon that day.</p>
				<p>Michael was still conventionally patriotic, but sometimes with the progress of the war a doubt would creep into his mind whether this increasing blazonry of a country’s emotion were so fine as once he had thought it, whether England were losing some of her self-control under reverses, and, worst of all, whether in her victories she were becoming blatant. He remembered how he had been sickened by the accounts of American hysteria during the war with Spain, whose weaker cause, true to his earliest inclinations, he had been compelled to champion. And now when the tide was turning in England’s favour, when every other boy came to school wearing a khaki tie quartered with blue or red and some of them even came tricked out with Union Jack waistcoats, when the wearing of a British general’s head on a button and the hissing of Kruger’s name at a pantomime were signs of high emotion, when many wastrels of his acquaintance had uniforms, and when the patriotism of their friends consisted of making these undignified supernumeraries drunk, Michael began to wonder whether war conducted by a democracy had ever been much more than a circus for the populace.</p>
				<p>And when one bleak morning in early spring he read in a fatal column that Captain Kenneth Ross had been killed in action, his smouldering resentment blazed out, and as he hurried to school with sickened heart and eyes in a mist of welling tears, he could have cursed everyone of the rosetted patriots for whose vainglory such a death paid the price. Alan, as he expected, was not at school, and Michael spent a restless, miserable morning. He hated the idea of discussing the news with his friends of the hot-water pipes, and when one by one the unimaginative, flaccid comments flowed easily forth upon an event that was too great for them even to hear, much less to speak of, Michael’s rage burst forth:</p>
				<p>“For God’s sake, you asses, don’t talk so much. I’m sick of this war. I’m sick of reading that a lot of decent chaps have died for nothing, because it is for nothing, if this country is never again going to be able to stand defeat or victory. War isn’t anything to admire in itself. All the good of war is what it makes of the people who fight, and what it makes of the people who stay at home.”</p>
				<p>The Olympians roared with laughter, and congratulated Michael on his humorous oration.</p>
				<p>“Can’t you see that I’m serious? that it is important to be gentlemen?” Michael shouted.</p>
				<p>“Who says we aren’t gentlemen?” demanded a very vapid, but slightly bellicose hero.</p>
				<p>“Nobody says <em>you</em> aren’t a gentleman, you ass; at least nobody says you eat peas with a knife, but, my God, if you think it’s decent to wear that damned awful button in your coat when fellows are being killed every day for you, for your pleasure, for your profit, for your existence, all I can say is I don’t.”</p>
				<p>Michael felt that the climax of this speech was somewhat weak, and he relapsed into silence, biting his nails with the unexpressed rage of limp words.</p>
				<p>“You might as well say that the School oughtn’t to cheer at a football match,” said Abercrombie the Captain.</p>
				<p>“I would say so, if I thought that all the cheerers never expected and never even intended to play themselves. That’s why professional football is so rotten.”</p>
				<p>“You were damned glad to get your Third Fifteen cap,” Abercrombie pointed out gruffly.</p>
				<p>The laugh that followed this rebuke from the mightiest of the immortals goaded Michael into much more than he had intended to say when he began his unlucky tirade.</p>
				<p>“Oh, was I?” he sneered. “That’s just where you’re quite wrong, because, as a matter of fact, I don’t intend to play football any more, if School Footer is simply to be a show for a lot of wasters. I’m not going to exert myself like an acrobat in a circus, if it all means nothing.”</p>
				<p>The heroes regarded Michael with surprise and distaste; they shrank from him coldly as if his unreasonable outburst in some way involved their honour. They laughed uncomfortably, each one hiding himself behind another’s shoulders, as if they mocked a madman. The bell for school rang, and the heroes left him. Michael, still enraged, went back to his classroom. Then he wondered if Alan would hate him for having made his uncle’s death an occasion for this breach of a school’s code of manners. He supposed sadly that Alan would not understand any more than the others what he felt. He cursed himself for having let these ordinary, obvious, fatheaded fools impose upon his imagination, as to lead him to consider them worthy of his respect. He had wasted three months in this society; he had thought he was happy and had congratulated himself upon at last finding school endurable. School was a prison, such as it always had been. He was seventeen and a schoolboy. It was ignominious. At one o’clock he waited for nobody, but walked quickly home to lunch, still fuming with the loss of his self-control and, as he looked back on the scene, of his dignity.</p>
				<p>His mother came down to lunch with signs of a morning’s tears, and Michael looked at her in astonishment. He had not supposed that she would be much affected by the death of Captain Ross, and he enquired if she had been writing to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross.</p>
				<p>“No, dear,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane. “Why should I have written to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross this morning?”</p>
				<p>“Didn’t you see in the paper?” Michael asked.</p>
				<p>“See what?”</p>
				<p>“That Captain Ross was killed in action.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, no,” gasped his mother, white and shuddering. “Oh, Michael, how horrible, and on the same day.”</p>
				<p>“The same day as what?”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane looked at her son for a moment very intently, as if she were minded to tell him something. Then the parlourmaid came into the room, and she seemed to change her mind, and finally said in perfectly controlled accents:</p>
				<p>“The same day as the announcement is made that⁠—that your old friend Lord Saxby has raised a troop of horse⁠—Saxby’s horse. He is going to Africa almost at once.”</p>
				<p>“Another gentleman going to be killed for the sake of these rowdy swine at home!” said Michael savagely.</p>
				<p>“Michael! What do you mean? Don’t you admire a man for⁠—for trying to do something for his country?”</p>
				<p>“It depends on the country,” Michael answered, “If you think it’s worth while doing anything for what England is now, I don’t. I wouldn’t raise a finger, if London were to be invaded tomorrow.”</p>
				<p>“I don’t understand you, dearest boy. You’re talking rather like a Radical, and rather like old Conservative gentlemen I remember as a girl. It’s such a strange mixture. I don’t think you quite understand what you’re saying.”</p>
				<p>“I understand perfectly what I’m saving,” Michael contradicted.</p>
				<p>“Well, then I don’t think you ought to talk like that. I don’t think it’s kind or considerate to me and, after you’ve just heard about Captain Ross’s death, I think it’s irreverent. And I thought you attached so much importance to reverence,” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane added in a complaining tone.</p>
				<p>Michael was vexed by his mother’s failure to understand his point of view, and became harder and more perverse every minute.</p>
				<p>“Lord Saxby would be shocked to hear you talking like this, shocked and horrified,” she went on.</p>
				<p>“I’m very sorry for hurting Lord Saxby’s feelings,” said Michael with elaborate sarcasm. “But really I don’t see that it matters much to him what I think.”</p>
				<p>“He wants to see you before he sails,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane.</p>
				<p>“To see me? Why?” gasped Michael. “Why on earth should he want to see me?”</p>
				<p>“Well, he’s⁠—he’s in a way the head of our family.”</p>
				<p>“He’s not taken much interest in me up to the present. It’s rather odd he should want to see me now when he’s going away.”</p>
				<p>“Michael, don’t be so bitter and horrid. Lord Saxby’s so kind, and he⁠—and he⁠—might never come back.”</p>
				<p>“Dearest mother,” said Michael, “I think you’re a little unreasonable. Why should I go and meet a man now, and perhaps grow to like him⁠—and then say goodbye to him, perhaps forever?”</p>
				<p>“Michael, do not talk like that. You are selfish and brutal. You’ve grown up to be perfectly heartless, although you can be charming. I think you’d better not see Lord Saxby. He’d be ashamed of you.”</p>
				<p>Michael rose in irritation.</p>
				<p>“My dear mother, what on earth business is it of Lord Saxby’s how I behave? I don’t understand what you mean by being ashamed of me. I have lived all these years, and I’ve seen Lord Saxby once. He sent me some Siamese stamps and some soldiers. I dare say he’s a splendid chap. I know I liked him terrifically, when I was a kid, and if he’s killed I shall be sorry⁠—I shall be more than sorry⁠—I shall be angry, furious that for the sake of these insufferable rowdies another decent chap is going to risk his life.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane put out her hand to stop Michael’s flowing tirade, but he paid no attention, talking away less to her than to himself. Indeed, long before he had finished, she made no pretence of listening, but merely sat crying quietly.</p>
				<p>“I’ve been thinking a good deal lately about this war,” Michael declared. “I’m beginning to doubt whether it’s a just war, whether we didn’t simply set out on it for brag and money. I’m not sure that I want to see the Boers conquered. They’re a small independent nation, and they have old-fashioned ideas and they’re narrow-minded Bible-worshippers, but there’s something noble about them, something much nobler than there is in these rotten adventurers who go out to fight them. Of course, I don’t mean by that people like Captain Ross or Lord Saxby. They’re gentlemen. They go either because it’s their duty or because they think it’s their duty. And they’re the ones that get killed. You don’t hear of these swaggerers in khaki being killed. I haven’t heard yet of many of them even going to the front at all. Oh, mother, I am fed up with the rotten core of everything that looks so fine on the outside.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane was now crying loud enough to make Michael stop in sudden embarrassment.</p>
				<p>“I say, mother, don’t cry. I expect I’ve been talking nonsense,” he softly told her.</p>
				<p>“I don’t know where you get these views. I was always so proud of you. I thought you were charming and mysterious, and you’re simply vulgar!”</p>
				<p>“Vulgar?” echoed Michael in dismay.</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane nodded vehemently.</p>
				<p>“Oh, well, if I’m vulgar, I’ll go.”</p>
				<p>Michael hurried to the door.</p>
				<p>“Where are you going?” asked his mother in alarm.</p>
				<p>“Oh, Lord, only to school. That’s what makes a scene like this so funny. After I’ve worked myself up and made you angry⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Not angry, dear. Only grieved,” interrupted his mother.</p>
				<p>“You were more than grieved when you said I was vulgar. At least I hope you were. But, after it’s all over, I go trotting off like a good little boy to school⁠—to school⁠—to school. Oh, mother, what is the good of expecting me to believe in the finest fellows in the world being killed, while I’m still at school? What’s the good of making me more wretched, more discontented, more alive to my own futile existence by asking me now, when he’s going away, to make friends with Lord Saxby? Oh, darling mother, can’t you realize that I’m no longer a little boy who wants to clap his hands at the sight of a red coat? Let me kiss you, mother, I’m sorry I was vulgar, but I’ve minded so dreadfully about Captain Ross, and it’s all for nothing.”</p>
				<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Fane let herself be petted by her son, but she did not again ask Michael to see Lord Saxby before he went away to the war.</p>
				<p>Alan was still absent at afternoon school, and Michael, disdaining his place in the heroic group, passed quickly into the classroom and read in Alison of Salamanca and Albuera and of the storming of Badajoz, wondering what had happened to his country since those famous dates. He supposed that then was the nation’s zenith, for from what he could make out of the Crimean War, that had been as little creditable to England as this miserable business of the present.</p>
				<p>In the afternoon Michael thought he would walk over to Notting Dale and see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner⁠—perhaps he would understand some of his indignation⁠—and this evening when all was quiet he must write to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross. On his way down the Kensington Road he met Wilmot, whom he had not seen since the summer, for luckily about the time of the row Wilmot had been going abroad and was only lately back. He recognized Wilmot’s fanciful walk from a distance, and nearly crossed over to the opposite pavement to avoid meeting him; but on second thoughts decided he would like to hear a fresh opinion of the war.</p>
				<p>“Why, here’s a delightful meeting,” said Wilmot, “I have been wondering why you didn’t come round to see me. You got my cards?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes, rather,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>“I have been in Greece and Italy. I wish you had been with me. I thought of you, as I sat in the ruined rose-gardens of Paestum. You’ve no idea how well those columns of honey-coloured Travertine would become you, Michael. But I’m so glad to see that you have not yet clothed yourself in khaki. This toy war is so utterly absurd. I feel as if I were living in a Christmas bazaar. How dreadfully these puttees and haversacks debase even the most beautiful figures. What is a haversack? It sounds so Lenten, so eloquent of mortification. I have discovered some charming Cyprian cigarettes. Do come and let me watch you enjoy them. How young you look, and yet how old!”</p>
				<p>“I’m feeling very fit,” said Michael loftily.</p>
				<p>“How abruptly informative you are! What has happened to you?”</p>
				<p>“I’m thinking about this war.”</p>
				<p>“Good gracious,” cried Wilmot in mincing amazement. “What an odd subject. Soon you will be telling me that by moonlight you brood upon the Albert Memorial. But perhaps your mind is full of trophies. Perhaps you are picturing to yourself in Piccadilly a second column of Trajan displacing the amorous and acrobatic Cupid who now presides over the painted throng. Come with me some evening to the Long Bar at the Criterion, and while the Maori-like barmaids titter in their <i xml:lang="fr">dévergondage</i>, we will select the victorious site and picture to ourselves the Boer commanders chained like hairy Scythians to the chariot of whatever absurd general chooses to accept the triumph awarded to him by our legislative bourgeoisie.”</p>
				<p>“I think I must be getting on,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>“How urgent! You speak like Phaeton or Icarus, and pray remember the calamities that befell them. But seriously, when are you coming to see me?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, I’m rather busy,” said Michael briefly.</p>
				<p>Wilmot looked at him curiously with his glittering eyes for a moment. Then he spoke again:</p>
				<p>“Farewell, Narcissus. Have you learnt that I was but a shallow pool in which to watch your reflection? Did I flatter you too much or not enough? Who shall say? But you know I’m always your friend, and when this love-affair is done, I shall always be interested to hear the legend of it told movingly when and where you will, but perhaps best of all in October when the full moon lies like a huge apricot upon the chimneys of the town. Farewell, Narcissus. Does she display your graces very clearly?”</p>
				<p>“I’m not in love with anybody, if that’s what you mean,” said Michael.</p>
				<p>“No? But you are on the margin of a strange pool, and soon you will be peeping over the bulrushes to stare at yourself again.”</p>
				<p>Then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilmot, making his pontifical and undulatory adieu, passed on.</p>
				<p>“Silly ass!” said Michael to himself. “And he always thinks he knows everything.”</p>
				<p>Michael turned out of the noisy main road into the sylvan urbanity of Holland Walk. A haze of tender diaphanous green clung to the boles of the smirched elms, softening the sooty decay that made their antiquity so grotesque and so dishonourable. Michael sat down for a while on a bench, inhaling the immemorial perfume of a London spring and listening to the loud courtship of the blackbirds in the ragged shrubberies that lined the railings of Holland Park. He was not made any the more content with himself by this effluence of revivified effort that impregnated the air around him. He was out of harmony with every impulse of the season, and felt just as tightly fettered now as long ago he used to feel on waits by this same line of blackened trees with Nurse to quell his lightest step towards freedom. Where was Nurse now? The pungent odour of privet blown along a dying wind of March was quick with old memories of forbidden hiding-places, and he looked up, half expectant of her mummified shape peering after his straying steps round the gnarled and blackened trunk of the nearest elm. Michael rose quickly and went on his way towards Notting Dale. This Holland Walk had always been a haunted spot, not at all a place to hearten one, especially where at the top it converged to a silent passage between wooden palings whose twinkling interstices and exudations of green slime had always been queerly sinister. Even now Michael was glad when he could hear again the noise of traffic in the Bayswater Road. As he walked on towards <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner’s house he gave rein to fanciful moralizings upon these two great roads on either side of the Park that ran a parallel course, but never met. How foreign it all seemed on this side with unfamiliar green omnibuses instead of red, with never even a well-known beggar or pavement-artist. The very sky had an alien look, seeming vaster somehow than the circumscribed clouds of Kensington. Perhaps after all the people of this intolerably surprising city were not so much to be blamed for their behaviour during a period of war. They had nothing to hold them together, to teach them to endure and enjoy, to suffer and rejoice in company. These great main roads sweeping West and East with multitudinous chimney-pots between were symbolic of the whole muddle of existence.</p>
				<p>“But what do I want?” Michael asked himself so loudly that an errand-boy stayed his whistling and stared after him until he turned the corner.</p>
				<p>“I don’t know,” he muttered in the face of a fussy little woman, who jumped aside to let him pass.</p>
				<p>Soon he was deep in one of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner’s armchairs and, without waiting even to produce one of the attenuated pipes he still affected, exclaimed with desolating conviction:</p>
				<p>“I’m absolutely sick of everything!”</p>
				<p>“What, again?” said the priest, smiling.</p>
				<p>“It’s this war.”</p>
				<p>“You’re not thinking of enlisting in the Imperial Yeomanry?”</p>
				<p>“Oh, no, but a friend of mine⁠—Alan Merivale’s uncle⁠—has been killed. It seems all wrong.”</p>
				<p>“My dear old chap,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner earnestly, “I’m sorry for you.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, it isn’t me you’ve got to pity,” Michael cried. “I’d be glad of his death. It’s the finest death a fellow can have. But there’s nothing fine about it, when one sees these gibbering blockheads shouting and yelling about nothing. I don’t know what’s the matter with England.”</p>
				<p>“Is England any worse than the rest of the world?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner.</p>
				<p>“All this wearing of buttons and khaki ties!” Michael groaned.</p>
				<p>“But that’s the only way the man in the street can show his devotion. You don’t object to ritualism, do you? You cross yourself and bow down. The church has colours and lights and incense. Do all these dishonour Our Lord’s death?”</p>
				<p>“That’s different,” said Michael. “And anyway I don’t know that the comparison is much good to me now. I think I’ve lost my faith. I am sorry to shock you, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner.”</p>
				<p>“You don’t shock me at all, my dear boy.”</p>
				<p>“Don’t I?” said Michael in slightly disappointed tones.</p>
				<p>“You forget that a priest is more difficult to shock than anyone on earth.”</p>
				<p>“I like the way you take yourself as a typical priest. Very few of them are like you.”</p>
				<p>“Come, that’s rather a stupid remark, I think,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner coldly.</p>
				<p>“Is it? I’m sorry. It doesn’t seem to worry you very much that I’ve lost my faith,” Michael went on in an aggrieved voice.</p>
				<p>“No, because I don’t think you have. I’ve got a high enough opinion of you to believe that if you really had lost your faith, you wouldn’t plunge comfortably down into one of my armchairs and give me the information in the same sort of tone you’d tell me you’d forgotten to bring back a book I’d lent you.”</p>
				<p>“I know you always find it very difficult to take me seriously,” Michael grumbled. “I suppose that’s the right method with people like me.”</p>
				<p>“I thought you’d come up to talk about the South African War. If I’d known the war was so near home, I shouldn’t have been so frivolous,” said the priest. His eyes were so merry in the leaping firelight that Michael was compelled against his will to smile.</p>
				<p>“Of course, you make me laugh at the time and I forget how serious I meant to be when I arrived, and it’s not until I’m at home again that I realize I’m no nearer to what I wanted to say than when I came up,” protested Michael.</p>
				<p>“I’m not the unsympathetic boor you’d make me out,” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner said.</p>
				<p>“Oh, I perfectly understand that all this heart-searching becomes a nuisance. But honestly, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner, I think I’ve done nothing long enough.”</p>
				<p>“Then you do want to enlist?” said the priest quickly.</p>
				<p>“Why must ‘doing’ mean only one thing nowadays? Surely South Africa hasn’t got a monopoly of whatever’s being done,” Michael argued. “No, I don’t want to enlist,” he went on. “And I don’t want to go into a monastery, and I’m not sure that I really even want to go to church again.”</p>
				<p>“Give up going for a bit,” advised the priest.</p>
				<p>Michael jumped up from the chair and walked over to the bay-window, through which came a discordant sound of children playing in the street outside.</p>
				<p>“It’s impossible to be serious with you. I suppose you’re fed up with people like me,” Michael complained. “I know I’m moody and irritating, but I’ve got a lot to grumble about. I don’t seem to have any natural inclination for any profession. I’m not a musical genius like my young sister. That’s pretty galling, you know, really. After all, girls can get along better than boys without any special gifts, and she simply shines compared with me. I have no father. I’ve no idea who I was, where I came from, what I’m going to be. I keep on trying to be optimistic and think everything is good and beautiful, and then almost at once it turns out bad and ugly.”</p>
				<p>“Has your religion really turned out bad and ugly?” asked the priest gently.</p>
				<p>“Not right through, but here and there, yes.”</p>
				<p>“The religion itself or the people who profess it?” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner persisted.</p>
				<p>“Doesn’t it amount to the same thing ultimately?” Michael parried. “But leave out religion for the moment, and consider this war. The only justification for such a war is the moral effect it has on the nations engaged. Now, I ask you, do you sincerely believe there has been a trace of any purifying influence since we started waving Union Jacks last September? It’s no good; we simply have not got it in us to stand defeat or victory. At any rate, if the Boers win, it will mean the preservation of something. Whereas if we win, we shall just destroy everything.”</p>
				<p>“Michael, what do you think is the important thing for this country at this moment?” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner asked.</p>
				<p>“Well, I suppose I still think it is that the people⁠—the great mass of the nation, that is⁠—should be happier and better. No, I don’t think that’s it at all. I think the important thing is that the people should be able to use the power that’s coming to them in bigger lumps every day. I’d like to think it wasn’t, I’d like to believe that democracy always will be as it always has been⁠—a self-made failure. But against my own will I can’t help believing that this time democracy is going to carry everything before it. And this war is going to hurry it on. Of course it is. The masses will learn their power. They’ll learn that generals can make fools of themselves, that officers can be done without, that professional soldiers can be cowards, but that simply by paying we can still win. And where’s the money coming from? Why, from the class that tried to be clever and bluff the people out of their power by staging this war. Well, do you mean to tell me that it’s good for a democracy, this sudden realization of their omnipotence? Look here, you think I’m an excitable young fool, but I tell you I’ve been pitching my ideals at a blank wall like so many empty bottles and⁠—”</p>
				<p>“Were they empty?” asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner. “Are you sure they were empty? May they not have been cruses of ointment the more precious for being broken?”</p>
				<p>“Well, I wish I could keep one for myself,” Michael said.</p>
				<p>“My dear boy, you’ll never be able to do that. You’ll always be too prodigal of your ideals. I should have no qualms about your future, whatever you did meanwhile. And, do you know, I don’t think I have many qualms about this England of ours, however badly she behaves sometimes. I’m glad you recognize that the people are coming into their own. I wish that <em>you</em> were glad, but you will be one day. The Catholic religion must be a popular religion. The Sabbath was made for man, you know. Catholicism is God’s method of throwing bottles at a blank wall⁠—but not empty bottles, Michael. On the whole, I would sooner that now you were a reactionary than a Dantonist. Your present attitude of mind at any rate gives you the opportunity of going forward, instead of going back; there will be plenty of ideals to take the places of those you destroy, however priceless. And the tragedy of age is not having any more bottles to throw.”</p>
				<p>During these words that came soothingly from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner’s firm lips Michael had settled himself down again in the armchair and lighted his pipe.</p>
				<p>“Come, now,” said the priest, “you and I have muddled through our discussion long enough, let’s gossip for a change. What’s Mark Chator doing?”</p>
				<p>“I haven’t seen much of him this term. He’s still going to take orders. I find old Chator’s eternal simplicity and goodness rather wearing. Life’s pretty easy for him. I wish I could get as much out of it as easily,” Michael answered.</p>
				<p>“Well, I can’t make any comment on that last remark of yours without plunging into platitudes that would make you terribly contemptuous of my struggles to avoid them. But don’t despise the Chators of this world.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, I don’t. I envy them. Well, I must go. Thanks awfully for putting up with me again.”</p>
				<p>Michael picked up his cap and hurried home. When he reached Carlington Road, he was inclined to tell his mother that, if she liked, he would go and visit Lord Saxby before he sailed; but when it came to the point he felt too shy to reopen the subject, and decided to let the proposal drop.</p>
				<p>He was surprised to find that it was much easier to write to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross about her husband than he thought it would be. Whether this long and stormy day (he could scarcely believe that he had only read the news about Captain Ross that morning) had purged him of all complexities of emotion, he did not know; but certainly the letter was easy enough.</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<header>
						<p>64 Carlington Road.</p>
					</header>
					<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My dear <span epub:type="z3998:recipient"><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross</span>,</p>
					<p>I can’t tell you the sadness of today. I’ve thought about you most tremendously, and I think you must be gloriously proud of him. I felt angry at first, but now I feel all right. You’ve always been so stunning to me, and I’ve never thanked you. I do want to see you soon. I shall never forget saying goodbye to Captain Ross. Mother asked me to go and say goodbye to Lord Saxby. I don’t suppose you ever met him. He’s a sort of cousin of ours. But I did not want to spoil the memory of that day at Southampton. I haven’t seen poor old Alan yet. He’ll be in despair. I’m longing to see him tomorrow. This is a rotten letter, but I can’t write down what I feel. I wish Stella had known Captain Ross. She would have been able to express her feelings.</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">With all my love,<br/>
							Your affectionate</p>
						<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">Michael.</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>In bed that night Michael thought what a beast he had made of himself that day, and flung the blankets feverishly away from his burnt-out self. Figures of well-loved people kept trooping through the darkness, and he longed to converse with them, inspired by the limitless eloquence of the nighttime. All that he would say to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viner, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ross, to Alan, even to good old Chator, splashed the dark with fiery sentences. He longed to be with Stella in a cool woodland. He almost got up to go down and pour his soul out upon his mother’s breast; but the fever of fatigue mocked his impulse and he fell tossing into sleep.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
