<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>To the Reverend E. D. Stone</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="dedication" epub:type="dedication z399:letter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">To the Reverend <abbr class="name">E. D.</abbr> Stone</h2>
<p epub:type="z3998:salutation">My dear <span epub:type="z3998:recipient"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stone</span>,</p>
<p>Since you have on several occasions deprecated the length of my books,
I feel that your name upon the dedicatory page of this my longest book
deserves explanation, if not apology.</p>
<p>When I first conceived the idea of 'Sinister Street,' I must admit I
did not realize that in order to present my theme fully in accord with
my own prejudice, I should require so much space. But by the time I had
written one hundred pages I knew that, unless I was prepared against my
judgment to curtail the original scheme, I must publish my book in a
form slightly different from the usual.</p>
<p>The exigencies of commercial production forbid a six shilling novel of
eight or nine hundred pages, and as I saw no prospect of confining
myself even to that length, I decided to publish in two volumes, each to
contain two divisions of my tale.</p>
<p>You will say that this is an aggravation of the whole matter and the
most impenitent sort of an apology. Yet are a thousand pages too long
for the history of twenty-five years of a man's life, that is to say if
one holds as I hold that childhood makes the instrument, youth tunes the
strings, and early manhood plays the melody?</p>
<p>The tradition of the English novel has always favoured length and
leisure; nor do I find that my study of French and Russian literature
leads me to strain after brevity. I do not send forth this volume as the
first of a trilogy. It is actually the first half of a complete book. At
the same time, feeling as I do that in these days of competitive
reading, the sudden vision of over a thousand pages would be inevitably
depressing, I give you the opportunity of rest at the five-hundredth
page, which reaches a climax at least as conclusive as any climax can be
that is not death. I do not pretend that I shall not be greatly
disappointed if next January or February you feel disinclined to read
'Dreaming Spires' and 'Romantic Education,' which will complete the
second volume. Yet I will be so considerate as to find someone else to
bear the brunt of dedication, and after all there will be no compulsion
either upon you or upon the public to resume.</p>
			<footer>
				<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">Yours ever affectionately,</p>
				<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">Compton Mackenzie</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:postscript">Let me add in postscript that 'Sinister Street' is a symbolic title
which bears no reference to an heraldic euphemism.</p>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Phillack, August 3, 1913.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
